### CHAPTER 5 The fundamentals of predator–prey interactions

… prey–predator systems, be they plants and herbivores, animal prey and four- or six-legged predators, insects and parasitoids… all such systems share certain general properties…

Robert May and Charlotte Watts, 2009, p. 431

Models are tools to understand the real world and. . .they can sharpen our intuition about ecological mechanisms. Even the simplest model, which may match no living system, can be useful.

William Murdoch et al., 2003, p. 3



In any community, species exist within a network of other potentially interacting species. Each species in this network consumes resources and is itself consumed by other species. The consumer–resource link is the fundamental building block from which increasingly complex food chains and food webs may be constructed (Figure 5.1; Murdoch et al. 2003). In this and the following four chapters, we will focus on the consumer–resource link to develop a mechanistic understanding of species interactions, including predation, interspecific competition, and mutualism/ facilitation. Here, we start with what is arguably the simplest consumer–resource interaction—one predator species feeding on one species of prey (Figure 5.2A). As the quote from May and Watts (2009) above suggests, we can define “predators” and “prey” broadly to include herbivores and plants, parasites and hosts, as well as more “traditional” notions of predators and prey. From this simple beginning, we will move on (in Chapter 6) to consider predators feeding on multiple prey species and how prey adaptations and behavioral responses may affect the predator–prey interaction (Figure 5.2B). Next, we will examine consumer–resource interactions from the perspective of competition (Chapters 7 and 8) and mutualism and facilitation (Chapter 9), after which we will put the pieces together by exploring interactions between multiple consumers and multiple resources using the constructs of ecological networks and food webs (Chapters 10 and 11). Each increase in complexity allows us to consider additional properties of multispecies consumer– resource interactions (Holt 1996).

In this chapter, we encounter two important concepts that should be part of every ecologist’s toolkit for the study of species interactions. The first is the Lotka–Volterra model (here formulated for predator and prey); the second is isocline analysis. The Lotka– Volterra model for two interacting species is the simplest possible consumer–resource model, and ecologists have had a love–hate relationship with it for a long time. Its critics would toss it in the dustbin of ecology as overly simplistic, outdated, and just plain wrong, but its supporters see it as a useful heuristic tool for gaining insight into the processes that govern the outcome of species interactions. Isocline analysis is introduced here as a means to visually interpret the outcomes of the Lotka–Volterra model. The usefulness of isocline analysis, however, extends well beyond the analysis of Lotka–Volterra type models, and we will make use of the technique again in considering consumer–resource models of interspecific competition and in the study of food webs.

This chapter is different from most others in this book in that it focuses almost exclusively on developing and analyzing simple mathematical models, with very few examples from nature. We have deemphasized empirical examples here because we want to move quickly beyond the study of a single predator species feeding on a single species of prey (which is a relatively rare interaction in nature). However, the study of such a simple predator–prey system is a useful place to start our exploration of the nitty-gritty of species interactions. In the next chapter, we will examine more complex and realistic interactions between predators and their prey, including many empirical examples that tie theoretical concepts of predation to the natural world.

Figure 5.1 Simple consumer–resource interaction networks: a food chain (A) and a food web (B). Consumer–resource links (represented by arrows) are the building blocks of these networks. Plus signs next to the arrows indicate positive effects on consumer species from eating a resource species; minus signs indicate negative effects on the resource species being consumed.  

Figure 5.2 Predator–prey networks of increasing complexity. In this chapter, we consider the simplest predator–prey interaction: one predator species feeding on one prey species (A). In Chapter 6, we will add multiple prey species (B) and allow those prey species to compete for resources (C). The dashed arrow in (C) indicates an indirect positive interaction between trophic levels (discussed in Chapters 6, 10, and 11). 



#### Predator functional responses

A fundamental property of any predator–prey interaction is the predator’s feeding rate (the number of prey consumed per predator per unit time). This rate is expected to increase as prey density increases; however, the relationship may take different forms. For example, at low prey densities, a predator’s feeding rate should be directly proportional to prey density (Turchin 2003), such that

feeding rate = aN [Eqn 5.1]

where N is the population density of the prey and a is a constant of proportionality, known as the predator’s per capita attack rate. However, at high prey densities, a predator’s feeding rate should reach some maximum set by the time required to capture and consume an individual prey item—referred to as that prey’s handling time. Holling (1959) termed the relationship between prey density and predator feeding rate the predator’s functional response, and he classified predator functional responses into three basic types (Figure 5.3).

The type I functional response presumes that a predator’s feeding rate (measured in units of number of prey consumed per individual predator per unit time) increases linearly with prey density (Equation 5.1; Figure 5.3A). Although mathematically simple, the type I functional response is unrealistic for most predators, as it assumes that a predator can consume a constant fraction of the prey population per unit time regardless of prey density. Consequently, the per capita death rate of the prey does not vary with its own density (Figure 5.3D). Some filter-feeding organisms, such as zooplankton may fit this relationship over a range of prey densities (Jeschke et al. 2004), but the consumption rate of most predators will approach a maximum set by the prey’s handling time. A maximum feeding rate could be incorporated into the type I functional response by allowing feeding rate to increase linearly with prey density up to a point where it abruptly becomes constant (Holling 1959). However, a more realistic scheme is to model the predator’s functional response as a curve that smoothly approaches an asymptote.



Holling’s **type II functional response** (Figure 5.3B) describes such a relationship, where

feeding rate = aN/(1+ahN) [Eqn 5.2]

and where h is the handling time (see Gotelli 2008 pp. 136–137 for a simple derivation of Equation 5.2). The type II functional response has been shown to fit the feeding rates of a wide variety of predators (Figure 5.4; Hassell 1978; Jeschke et al. 2004), and it is to be expected whenever a single predator is foraging without interference for a single type of prey (Turchin 2003). Note that, at very low prey densities, the ahN term in the denominator is small and the feeding rate approximates a type I functional response. At very high prey densities, the feeding rate approaches a maximum rate equal to the inverse of the prey’s handling time (1/h). Note, too, that under a type II functional response, an individual prey’s probability of death declines as prey density increases (Figure 5.3E). It is not important that the type II functional response fit Equation 5.2 exactly; rather, the defining property of the type II functional response is that it increases at a decreasing rate (see Abrams 1990 for examples).

Holling characterized the **type III functional response** as a sigmoidal relationship (Figure 5.3C), in which a predator’s feeding rate accelerates over an initial increase in prey density but then decelerates at higher prey densities. A useful formulation for the type III functional response is

feeding rate = c * (N^2)/(d^2 + N^2) [Eqn 5.3]

where c = h^(–1), the maximum feeding rate, and d = (ah)–1, the half-saturation constant (the prey density at which the feeding rate is half the maximum; see Turchin 2003 for alternative formulations and further discussion of the functional response). With a type III functional response, the prey’s per capita death rate peaks at an intermediate prey density (Figure 5.3F).

Figure 5.3 The predator’s functional response and its impact on the prey’s per capita death rate. The top row (A–C) shows the three types of functional responses described by Holling (1959). In each case, the number of prey eaten per predator per unit time increases with increasing prey density. The increase in predation rate with prey density is linear for the type I response, saturating for the type II response, and sigmoidal for the type III response. The bottom row (D–F) shows how the per capita death rate of the prey population changes with prey density under each type of predator functional response.  

Figure 5.4 The number of aphids consumed in 24 hours by three species of adult ladybird beetles (Cheilomenes sexmaculata, Coccinella transversalis, and Propylea dissecta) feeding at different aphid densities in the laboratory. All three beetle species exemplify the type II functional response. After Pervez and Omkar 2005; photograph © Dr J. Burgess/Photo Researchers, Inc.  

Holling (1959) suggested that the type III functional response might best apply to vertebrate predators (which might develop a search image for abundant prey), whereas invertebrates might best fit type II. However, it is now thought that the tendency of predators to fit either the type II or type III functional response is more a function of foraging mode. Predators feeding on a single prey type (specialists) commonly exhibit a type II functional response, whereas predators that switch between feeding on different prey types (generalists) tend to exhibit a type III functional response. Predators may also have a type III functional response if they adjust their foraging effort adaptively because it is costly to look for prey when there are very few around (see Abrams 1982, for theory, and Sarnelle and Wilson 2008, for a likely example). Because the current focus is on the interaction between a predator and a single prey species, discussion of prey switching and the type III functional response will be deferred to Chapter 6, where the interactions between selective predators and multiple prey will be considered.

In all the formulations of the functional response mentioned above, a predator’s feeding rate is determined only by the density of its prey, and feeding rates are unaffected by the number of other predators present (except as mediated through changes in prey density). In other words, these formulations are prey-dependent. However, in some situations, predators may interfere with one another’s ability to capture prey, or they may facilitate one another’s success by group foraging. In such cases, the formulation of the functional response should include the density of predators, as well as the density of prey. A simple way to handle this requirement is to divide the number of prey available by the number of predators (P) and substitute the quantity N/P for N in the above formulations of the functional response (Equations 5.1–5.3). There is a sizable literature on this form of ratio-dependent predation (e.g., Akçakaya et al. 1995; Arditi and Ginzburg 2012), and there has been considerable debate as well about which form of the functional response (prey-dependent or ratiodependent) provides the best starting point to construct simple predator–prey models (Arditi and Ginzburg 2012; Abrams 2015). Most predator–prey models incorporate prey-dependent processes, perhaps because prey density must affect the functional response, whereas predator dependence may or may not be important. Here, the traditional preydependent formulations (Equations 5.1–5.3) will be used to examine the factors affecting the abundance and stability of predator–prey populations.



#### The Lotka–Volterra model



The simplest model describing the population dynamics of a single predator species feeding on a single prey species was developed independently in the 1920s by Alfred Lotka (1925) and Vito Volterra (1926). In the Lotka–Volterra model, the prey population (N) is assumed to grow exponentially in the absence of predators:

dN/dt = rN [Eqn 5.4]

where N is the number of individuals in the prey population and r is the prey’s per capita population growth rate. If the predator has a linear (type I) functional response (i.e., the number of prey killed is directly proportional to prey density), and if predation is the only source of mortality for the prey population, then the net rate of change in prey numbers is

dN/dt = rN - aNP [Eqn 5.5]

Note that the units for a, the predator’s per capita attack rate, are the number of prey eaten per prey per predator per unit time, and that a corresponds to the slope of the predator’s linear (type I) functional response (see Figure 5.3A).

In the absence of prey, the predator population is assumed to decline exponentially as

dP/dt = -qP [Eqn 5.6]

where q is the predator’s per capita mortality rate (which is density-independent); the units for q are the number of deaths per predator per unit time. Growth of the predator population depends on the number of prey consumed per unit time, which is equal to aNP, and on the predator’s efficiency at turning prey eaten into new predators, which is assumed to be a simple constant ( f ). Thus, the birth rate of the predator population is equal to faNP, and the dynamics of the predator population is described by

dP/dt / = faNP - qP [Eqn 5.7]

Together, Equations 5.5 and 5.7 make up the Lotka– Volterra predator–prey model.

##### Isocline analysis

The properties of the Lotka–Volterra model can be investigated by determining the zero growth isocline for each population. Zero growth isoclines define conditions in which a population is neither growing nor declining. For a prey population whose dynamics are governed by Equation 5.5,

dN/dt = 0, when rN = aNP

Thus, the prey population will be at equilibrium (neither growing nor declining) when the density of predators P equals the quantity r/a. Likewise, for the predator population,

dP/dt = 0 when faNP = qP

and the predator population will be at equilibrium when the density of prey N equals q/fa.

It is useful to plot these zero growth isoclines on a graph where the x-axis is prey density (N) and the y-axis is predator density (P). Because q, f, a, and r are constants in the Lotka–Volterra model, the zero growth isoclines for the predator and the prey are straight lines. Looking first at the prey isocline (Figure 5.5A), it can be seen that at predator densities less than r/a, the prey population increases, and at predator densities greater than r/a, the prey population decreases. Thus, a specific number of predators (equal to r/a) will maintain the prey population at equilibrium (zero growth). Looking next at the predator isocline (Figure 5.5B), it can be seen that at prey densities less than q/fa, the predator population decreases, and at prey densities greater than q/fa, the predator population increases. Thus, a specific number of prey (equal to q/fa) will maintain the predator population at equilibrium. Figure 5.5 illustrates an important, but potentially confusing point—it is the number of predators present that determines whether the prey population is at equilibrium, dN/dt = 0. Likewise, it is the number of prey present that determines whether or not the predator population is at equilibrium, dP/dt = 0.

Figure 5.5 Zero growth isoclines for the Lotka–Volterra predator–prey model. (A) The prey’s zero growth isocline is a horizontal line. The prey population will increase at predator densities below the line and decrease at predator densities above the line. At a predator density of r/a, the prey population will not change (dN/dt = 0). (B) The predator’s zero growth isocline is a vertical line. The predator population will increase at prey densities to the right of the line and decrease at prey densities to the left of the line. At a prey density q/fa, the predator population will not change (dP/dt = 0). (C) Predator and prey zero growth isoclines plotted on the same graph. The intersection of the two isoclines defines four regions in predator–prey state space, and the vectors (narrow-lined arrows) show the response of the predator and prey populations in each region. The heavy diagonal arrows show the combined trajectories of the predator and prey populations in each region (i.e., the resultant vectors). Over time, the predator and prey populations will cycle continuously, as illustrated by the ellipse. Visit http://communityecologybook.org/predprey.html to see a dynamic version of this model.  

Next, let’s plot the predator and the prey isoclines on the same graph (Figure 5.5C). Note that the two isoclines intersect at a single point; only at this equilibrium point will prey and predator populations remain constant. Away from the intersection of the predator and prey isoclines, the numbers of predator and prey will change over time. How they change is illustrated by the arrows (vectors of population change) in each of the four quadrants in Figure 5.5C. For example, in the upper right-hand quadrant, both prey and predators are abundant. The predator population increases in this region because prey numbers are above those needed to support zero growth in the predator population (r/a). In this same region, however, the prey population is declining because predator abundance is above that required to hold the prey population in check (q/fa). As a result, the joint trajectory of the two populations (illustrated by the heavy arrow) will move the system (over time) into the upper lefthand quadrant. In the upper left-hand quadrant, both predator and prey numbers will decline. A little reflection on the projected dynamics of predator and prey in each quadrant of Figure 5.5C should convince you that the population sizes will track counter clockwise in state space (i.e., all possible abundances of predators and prey) along an approximate ellipse.

How does this tracking in state space in Figure 5.5C correspond to changes in the population growth curves for predator and prey over time? The answer can be seen in Figure 5.6A. Both predator and prey populations cycle smoothly in abundance over time, with the amplitude and period (time required for a full oscillation) remaining unchanged. The predator population always lags behind the prey population by about one-quarter of a cycle, whereas the amplitude of the cycles is determined by the initial population densities (densities that start farther from the equilibrium point result in cycles of larger amplitude).

Figure 5.6 (A) In the Lotka–Volterra model, predator–prey population dynamics show continuous cycles over time. The predator population lags one-fourth of a cycle behind the prey population. (B) An external perturbation to the system (here, a change in the initial densities of predator and prey, but no change in model parameter values) results in a change in the amplitude of the cycles (only the prey cycles are shown here for clarity). The prey densities from Figure 5.6A are shown (1) along with the densities resulting from a change in initial densities (2). (C) Prey densities plotted in state space (i.e., the density of prey at time t plotted against the density of predators at time t) as predicted by the Lotka–Volterra model, with different starting densities (1, 2) but the same parameter values. After Murdoch et al. (2003).  

The Lotka–Volterra model is neutrally stable. That is, its predator and prey populations will cycle indefinitely, with the same amplitude and period; however, if the system is perturbed in any way (e.g., something comes along to change predator or prey numbers), that perturbation will cause the system to cycle with a similar period but a new amplitude determined by the size of the perturbation (Figure 5.6B,C). A model displaying such initial conditiondependent oscillations cannot be a good representation of the real world, where perturbations are common. Moreover, as Murdoch et al. (2003) note, the Lotka–Volterra model is “structurally unstable,” and almost any change in the model’s structure changes the predicted dynamics. Such sensitivity is often leveled as a criticism at the Lotka–Volterra model. However, sensitivity can also be a useful property because it allows us to explore how adding different ecological processes to the simple model will change the dynamics of predator and prey (Murdoch et al. 2003).  

##### Adding more realism to the Lotka–Volterra model

Notably absent from the simple Lotka–Volterra model are:

• self-limitation in the prey or predator population;

• a realistic predator functional response.

No prey population can grow without bounds, even in the absence of predation. Therefore, a more realistic predator–prey model needs to include a density-dependent term specifying how the prey’s growth rate declines with prey density. One possibility [originally proposed by Volterra (1931)] is to model prey growth in the absence of predation using the logistic equation (see Chapter 4). In this case, the prey’s equation becomes

dN/dt = rN (1 - N/K) - aNP [Eqn 5.8]

In Equation 5.8, there are now two factors regulating the growth of the prey population—predator density and prey density. The effect of adding prey self-limitation to the model is to rotate the prey zero growth isocline in a clockwise direction (Figure 5.7A) so that it has a negative slope everywhere. Intuitively, this makes sense; as prey density increases, it takes fewer predators to keep the prey population in check (zero predators are required when the prey population is at K).

Adding self-limitation to the prey population dramatically changes the stability of the predator– prey interaction. The intersection of the predator and prey isoclines in Figure 5.7A defines an equilibrium point (where dN/dt = 0 and dP/dt = 0), just as it did in Figure 5.5C. However, if predator or prey densities are perturbed, the populations will recover and return to the equilibrium point (population oscillations will damp out over time; Figure 5.7B). Thus, self-limitation in the prey population acts to stabilize the predator–prey interaction.

Figure 5.7 Predator–prey isoclines (A) and predator–prey dynamics (B) for a model of the Lotka–Volterra type when prey self-limitation (logistic growth) is included. Visit http:// communityecologybook.org/predprey.html to see an online dynamic version of this model.  

The stability of the predator–prey equilibrium can be determined by formal stability analysis (see Murdoch et al. 2003, for a good introduction to local stability analysis). However, when the predator’s per capita growth rate depends on prey density (and not on its own density), a simple rule of thumb can be applied to judge the stability of the equilibrium point marked by the intersection of predator and prey isoclines. If the predator isocline intersects the prey isocline on its negative slope (i.e., Figure 5.7A), the predator–prey equilibrium is stable. Intersections on a positively sloped prey isocline are unstable. This rule of thumb glosses over some important complexities, but it will suffice for our heuristic treatment of the factors that affect predator and prey dynamics in simple models.



#### The Rosenzweig–MacArthur model

The analyses presented above have assumed a linear (type I) predator functional response, where each predator consumes a constant fraction of the prey population per unit time. A type I functional response might be a good approximation at low prey densities, but it cannot be true at high prey densities. When prey are abundant, the predation rate will reach a maximum determined by handling time. Clearly, in order to build a more realistic predator– prey model, a more realistic functional response is required. Rosenzweig and MacArthur (1963) were the first to incorporate the more realistic type II functional response into a predator–prey model that also includes self-limitation in the prey, where

dN/dt = rN (1 - N/K) - aNP/(1+ahN) [Eqn 5.9]

dP/dt = faNP/(1 + ahN) -qP [Eqn 5.10]

This model may well be the simplest representation of an actual predator–prey interaction and it is often used in theoretical ecology (Turchin 2003).

Figure 5.8 Predator and prey isoclines for the Rosenzweig–MacArthur model. Note that under this model the prey zero growth isocline is humped rather than the straight line of the Lotka–Volterra model seen in Figure 5.5A (see text for explanation). Left-hand panels illustrate stable predator–prey interactions; right-hand panels illustrate unstable interactions (limit cycles). Visit http://communityecologybook.org/predprey.html to see an online dynamic version of this model.

In Rosenzweig and MacArthur’s model, the prey zero growth isocline has a hump (Figure 5.8). It is important to understand why this is so. Recall that with a type II functional response, the prey’s per capita death rate declines with each increase in prey density (see Figure 5.3). Therefore, as prey density goes up, the number of predators required to keep the prey population in check must also increase. This relationship generates the initial ascending limb of the humped prey isocline. However, self-limitation in the prey population will eventually take over, and at the prey’s carrying capacity (K), no predators are required to control the prey population—hence, the descending limb of the humped prey isocline. Thus, adding a bit more biological realism to the Lotka– Volterra model (i.e., a maximum predator feeding rate and self-limitation in the prey population) changes the shape of the prey isocline and (as will be seen later) allows us to better represent the observed dynamics of real predator–prey populations.

The Rosenzweig–MacArthur model exhibits a wider and more realistic range of dynamics than does the Lotka–Volterra model, including conditions in which predator and prey coexist at a stable equilibrium point, or in a stable limit cycle, or one or both populations go extinct. A formal analysis of the conditions leading to these outcomes is beyond the scope of this book (see Murdoch et al. 2003 or Case 2000 for a good introduction to this topic). Luckily, we can understand much about the behavior of the system simply by noting whether the predator isocline intersects the prey isocline to the right or the left of the hump. Intersections to the right of the hump result in a stable equilibrium point, to which predator and prey densities return if perturbed away from it (Figure 5.8A, C). Intersections to the left of the hump do not have a stable equilibrium point. Rather, predator and prey populations end up in a limit cycle, in which predator and prey densities cycle endlessly (Figure 5.8B,D). It is important to note that limit cycles are a common feature of predator–prey models of this type (May 1973a) and that they are fundamentally different from the predator–prey cycles generated by neutral stability in the Lotka–Volterra model (Murdoch et al. 2003). A predator–prey system in a limit cycle responds to perturbation by returning (over time) to its original cycle (Figure 5.9), whereas a predator–prey system displaying neutral stability responds to perturbation with a change in the amplitude of the cycle (see Figure 5.6). If, however, it is assumed that some minimum population density for the persistence of predator or prey (due to finite population size), then systems displaying limit cycles may not recover from perturbation, which may lead to the extinction of the predator, or to the extinction of both predator and prey. Such outcomes are possible when predator and prey isoclines intersect well to the left of the hump (see May 1973a for a general discussion of limit cycles).

Figure 5.9 An example of a stable limit cycle for predator and prey. (A) In a stable limit cycle, the densities of predator and prey cycle perpetually in a counterclockwise direction (marked by the heavy closed loop), tracing out the densities over time shown in (B). If we perturb the populations, pushing them to a point either above or below the limit cycle (black dots in A), they return to the cycle. After Murdoch et al. (2003).  

##### The suppression–stability trade-off

It is possible to understand what drives the predator– prey interaction toward stability or instability by considering the relative efficiency of the predator at controlling its prey. Intersections of the predator isocline to the right of the hump (Figure 5.8A) describe a situation in which the predator is relatively inefficient at consuming prey or turning prey into new predators. In this case, the prey population exists at a high density relative to its carrying capacity and is predominantly self-limited. Intersections to the left of the hump (Figure 5.8) describe an efficient predator that holds its prey population at a low density relative to its carrying capacity. Thus, stability is more likely the closer the prey population is to its own carrying capacity and when the predator is relatively inefficient (and is, therefore, less likely to overexploit the prey population and drive it to low densities).

Rosenzweig (1971) recognized a surprising consequence of the fact that the predator–prey interaction becomes less stable the more responsible the predator is for controlling its prey. Presumably, we might expect that an increase in the prey’s food supply (and, therefore, an increase in its carrying capacity, K) would benefit the prey population and help it better withstand the impact of predation. However, as Figure 5.10 shows, increasing the prey’s carrying capacity may have exactly the opposite result. Increasing carrying capacity (K) may cause the predator isocline to intersect the prey isocline to the left of the hump, destabilizing the equilibrium and potentially causing one or both species to go extinct. Rosenzweig (1971) termed this result the paradox of enrichment, and he suggested that it could explain the loss of species in ecosystems experiencing increased nutrient input (e.g., eutrophication in aquatic ecosystems). Although the term “paradox of enrichment” is entrenched in the literature, Murdoch et al. (2003) suggest that this phenomenon might better be termed the suppression–stability trade-off, to emphasize the fact that the further a predator suppresses the prey equilibrium below the prey’s carrying capacity, the more likely the system is to be unstable.

Figure 5.10 An illustration of the “paradox of enrichment” (also known as the “suppression-stability trade-off”; see Murdoch et al. (2003)) using the Rosenzweig–MacArthur predator–prey model. (A) The prey’s hump-shaped zero growth isocline and regions of predator densities where the prey population is increasing or decreasing. (B) Intersection of the vertical predator isocline with a series of prey isoclines for three increasing values of prey carrying capacity (K1, K2, K3). Increasing the prey’s carrying capacity shifts the intersection of the predator isocline from the right to the left of the prey isocline’s hump. Intersections to the right of the hump are stable, and perturbations to the system will return to a stable equilibrium point over time (black dashed arrows). Intersections to the left of the hump are unstable (red dashed arrow) and may result in the extinction of the predator or of both predator and prey.

##### Density-dependent predators

Up to this point, we have modeled a predator population whose growth rate is dependent only on the density of its prey. In the Lotka–Volterra model (with its type I functional response),

dP/dt / = faNP - qP

In the Rosenzweig–MacArthur model (with its type II functional response),

dP/dt = faNP/(1+ ahN) - qP

The predator isocline is a straight, vertical line in both models. We can see this by setting dP/dt = 0 and solving for N, which yields N = q/fa and N = q/fa – ahq, respectively.

As Rosenzweig (1977, p. 373) notes, the concept of a vertical predator isocline can be confusing. “If the victim [prey] isocline has provided difficulties, the vertical predator isocline has been positively mystifying not only to students, but also to some theoretical ecologists.” The key to understanding the vertical predator isocline comes from recognizing that:

*slope in isoclines is generated only if the density of the species in question directly and instantaneously affects its own birth or death rates. The victim [prey] isocline slopes because more victims mean less resources per victim per instant, and less loss to the same number of predators per victim per instant. Are such things true about every predator? No. Some predators just collect food and ignore each other. At any instant, their rate of success depends only on the amount of food that exists. Of course, in the next instant, far less food will be present if there are 106 predators catching it, compared to 104. But that is taken care of by a change in food density. The larger population finds itself in the next instant with less food and may well decline. In order for the predator isocline to slope positively, some predators must actually encounter the same particle of resource at the same instant, so that at most but one gets fed. Or they must both need the same den or territory.*

Predators that interfere with one another are expected to show direct density dependence (Arditi and Ginzburg 2012) and have a “bent” predator isocline that curves to the right (Figure 5.11). Predator interference can be defined broadly to include the energetic costs of defending a territory or chasing away other predators, as well as physically fighting with another predator over a food item. The energetic costs of interference result in a rightward bend in the predator isocline. A simple way to think about this is to recognize that, as predator density increases, each predator will expend more energy interacting with other predators. Therefore, each predator must encounter a higher density of prey to obtain enough energy to replace itself. Predator interference may also arise if the presence of more predators scares prey, so that prey spend more time in a refuge when more predators are present, thus effectively reducing prey abundance (Abrams 1982). An important outcome of including direct density dependence in the predator population is that it tends to stabilize the predator–prey interaction (i.e., the predator isocline is more likely to intersect the prey isocline to the right of the hump; see Figure 5.11).



#### Herbivory and parasitism

As noted in the introduction to this chapter, predator–prey interactions can be viewed broadly as any relationship where one species consumes another species. Herbivory describes an interaction where a predator (e.g., a grazer) eats all or part of a plant. Examples of herbivory include sheep grazing grass, caterpillars eating leaves, birds foraging on berries, and aphids feeding on phloem. Parasitism describes an interaction where a parasite consumes all or part of its host (hosts are often both food and habitat for a parasite). Examples of parasitism include fleas on a dog (an ectoparasite), tapeworms in a mammal gut (an endoparasite), viruses and protozoans that cause disease (e.g., plasmodium causing malaria), plants that are parasites on other plants (mistletoe), and much more. A shared feature of herbivory and parasitism is that herbivores and parasites often do not kill their prey, but instead consume some fraction of the prey’s biomass, reducing prey growth and fecundity. This partial consumption of prey influences how we model predatory–prey interactions for herbivores and parasites. Herbivory can be modeled using a mathematical framework very similar to that already discussed in this chapter, but with some minor modifications. Parasitism models, on the other hand, may take different forms.

##### Herbivory

Herbivores that feed on tiny plants (e.g., phytoplankton (algae) in freshwater and marine systems, or small annual plants on land) often consume the entire individual. In this case, the dynamics of the plant population can be represented by the number of plants present (as in the previous models in this chapter). However, when plants are larger and longer-lived (perennial), herbivores (grazers) may consume only a portion of a plant without killing it. In this case, we can model the plant population using plant biomass (V) instead of the number of individual plants, and herbivore abundance can be modeled as either the number of individuals or as herbivore biomass (H). For example, the Rozenzweig–MacArthur model for plant and herbivore populations could take the form

dV/dt = rV (1 - V/K) - aVH/(1 + ahV) [Eqn 5.11]

dH/dt = faVH/(1 + ahV) - qH [Eqn 5.12]

where “prey” and “predator” abundances are measured in biomass and the constants in the model are expressed as “per unit biomass,” rather than “per capita”. The herbivore’s functional response can be modeled as either a Type I, Type II (as in Equation 5.12), or Type III; all three functional response types have been observed in nature (e.g., Lundberg 1988; Turchin and Batzli 2001; Sarnelle and Wilson 2008). In general, grazing systems that follow the Rosenzweig–MacArthur model are predicted to show large amplitude oscillations between grazer and plant abundance, except in the most unproductive systems (Noy-Meir 1975; Turchin 2003). Turchin and Batzli (2001) argued, however, that it may be unrealistic to model plant population growth with a logistic model in systems where herbivores consume only the above-ground portion of plant biomass. Instead, they proposed that, when plants regrow from energy stored in the roots, their growth function is better modeled as a hyperbolic curve, rather than a logistic curve (Figure 5.12). An important consequence of modeling plant population growth as regrowth, rather than logistic growth, is that is that it greatly stabilizes plant-grazer dynamics (Turchin and Batzli 2001). Intuitively, this increase in stability is due to the fact that logistic growth has an inherent time lag built in—the more vegetation is eaten, the longer it takes to grow back, whereas the regrowth function has no time lag.

Figure 5.12 Two models for plant population growth. Logistic growth follows the equation dV/dt = uV (K-V)/K, where V is vegetation biomass (per unit area), u is the per capita rate of plant growth at V near zero, and K is vegetation carrying capacity. The regrowth model follows the equation dV/dt = u (K-V)/K, where u is the initial regrowth rate (at V near 0). The regrowth equation is often used to model nutrient dynamics in a laboratory chemostat and in theoretical treatments of species competing for abiotic resources. Figure and equations from Turchin and Batzli (2001).

Plants employ a variety of chemical and physical defenses against herbivores that work to reduce herbivore feeding, growth, survivorship, or fecundity (Feeny 1976; Coley 1983; Züst and Agrawal 2017). Plant defenses can be incorporated into standard predator–prey models (such as the Rosenzweig– MacArthur model) by modifying the herbivore’s functional response, where the functional response equation (Type II) is changed to incorporate either:

• a decrease in herbivore feeding rate as a behavioral response to ingested toxins; or 

• a negative effect of toxins on herbivore ingestion rate or growth (Feng et al. 2008; Feng and DeAngelis 2017).

The results of Feng et al.’s analysis demonstrate that plant defenses, and how predators respond to these defenses, can have both quantitative and qualitative effects on the outcome of the predator–prey interaction, including effects on stability and coexistence. Plants may also enlist the help of mutualists to counteract herbivory. A classic example is the ant/ acacia mutualism, where members of acacia tree family provide food and shelter to various species of ants in return for protection by the ants against insect and mammal herbivores (Janzen 1966; Palmer et al. 2008). Examples of these mutualistic defense mechanisms will be discussed in more detail in the chapter on beneficial interactions (Chapter 9). When attacked by herbivores, plants often increase their level of defense (referred to as inducible defense) above that expressed by the plant in the absence of herbivory (referred to as constituent defense).

Likewise, animals show constituent and inducible defenses (e.g., longer spines, hardened shells) against their predators, as well as exhibiting antipredator behaviors. The consequences of these inducible defenses and antipredator behaviors will be explored in the next Chapter 6 and Chapter 11.

##### Parasitism and disease

The interactions between animal hosts and their viral, bacterial, protozoan (microparasites) infections or their helminth and arthropod parasites (macroparasites) represent another important type of predator–prey interaction. The distinction between microparasites and macroparasites is that microparasites multiply (increase in abundance) in their definitive host, whereas macroparasites do not (they need additional intermediate hosts). One can model host-pathogen dynamics using two different frameworks. One class of models, generally applied to macroparasites, is similar to the predator–prey models already discussed in that it keeps track of both resource (host) and consumer (parasite) abundances. The foundational host-parasite models were developed by Roger Anderson and Robert May in the 1970’s and 1980’s (Anderson and May 1978; May and Anderson 1978). They showed that, in general, if the parasite has a more significant effect on host fecundity than on host survival, the system will have a propensity to oscillate (May and Anderson 1978). Additional factors tending to stabilized host-macroparasite interactions are parasite aggregation and host logistic growth (Rosà et al. 2006). The second type of host-pathogen models doesn’t track pathogen numbers directly, but instead simply keeps track of the number of healthy vs infected hosts, and the mode and rate of transmission of the pathogen. This type of model is used in epidemiology to study diseases caused by microparasites such as viruses and bacteria. In Chapter 13, we highlight some of the parallels between epidemiology models and models of metapopulations; e.g., the importance of patch/host densities and dispersal/transmission rates in sustaining a population or a disease epidemic.

Turchin (2003) provides a nice discussion of the essential features of various predator–prey, herbivore–plant, and host–pathogen models, noting their similarities and differences. As Turchin notes, each of these consumer-resource systems is prone to oscillatory dynamics (“prey” and “predator” numbers tend to cycle through time) and stability is enhanced by the addition of density-dependent population growth in the “prey” or the “predator”. One difference between microparasite models and standard predator–prey models (i.e., Rosenzweig– MacArthur) is that transmission rate in most microparasite models is often assumed to follow the equivalent of a linear Type I functional response. This will tend to make epidemic models more stable than predator-prey models containing a Type II functional response (Turchin 2003).

In the previous brief discussion, we have sought to emphasize the features shared in common when considering the dynamical properties of all predator–prey systems, be they herbivores and plants, parasites and hosts, or wolves and rabbits (i.e., ecology’s more “traditional” notion of predators and prey). There are, however, unique aspects of each of these interactions that have important consequences for how ecologists develop more refined theories to describe their dynamics and predict their outcomes. Those interested in learning more about the details of modeling herbivory and parasitism will find a rich literature at their disposal (e.g. Crawley 2007). Now we need to move on from simple one predator–one prey systems to consider what happens when predators feed on multiple species of prey and when prey species may respond to predators by adaptively altering their behaviors or their phenotype.



#### Summary

1. The relationship between prey density and predator feeding rate is referred to as the predator’s functional response. Predator functional responses can be classified into three basic types:

​	• In a type I functional response, a predator’s feeding rate increases linearly with prey density (unrealistic for most predators).

​	• In a type II functional response, a predator’s feeding rate increases with prey density, but at a steadily decreasing rate. This relationship can be modeled as a curve that approaches an asymptote.

​	• A type III functional response is a sigmoidal relationship in which a predator’s feeding rate accelerates over an initial increase in prey density, then decelerates at higher prey densities.

2. The Lotka–Volterra model is a simple model of the dynamics of a single predator species feeding on a single prey species. It assumes that the prey population will grow exponentially in the absence of predators; that the feeding rate of predators follows a type I functional response; and that growth of the predator population depends on the number of prey consumed per unit time.

3. The Lotka–Volterra model produces coupled oscillations in predator and prey populations. Adding self-limitation to the prey population (e.g., incorporating a carrying capacity K) acts to stabilize the system, which returns to a stable equilibrium point after being perturbed.

4. The Rosenzweig–MacArthur model of predator– prey dynamics incorporates the more realistic type II functional response, which causes the prey isocline to be humped. If the predator isocline intersects the prey isocline on the right of the hump, the intersection defines a stable equilibrium point, and the system will return to this equilibrium point following a perturbation. If the predator isocline intersects the prey isocline on the left of the hump, the system is unstable (predator and prey populations oscillate in a limit cycle); perturbations will cause the amplitude of the cycle to change, and one or both species may go extinct.

5. Predator–prey systems are more likely to be stable when the predator is relatively inefficient; this phenomenon is called the suppression–stability trade-off. Increasing the carrying capacity for prey may decrease the stability of the system, a phenomenon known as the paradox of enrichment.

6. Adding predator self-limitation (e.g., interference from other predators or limiting resources for predators) will cause the predator isocline to bend to the right and tends to stabilize the predator–prey system.

7. Herbivory can show most of the same dynamics as predator–prey systems, but in cases where the predator consumes only part of the vegetative structure of an individual plant, regrowth can happen quickly, which can help to stabilize dynamics.

8. Likewise, parasitism and diseases models often show dynamics similar to predator–prey systems. One important difference is that infections may not be fatal, leading to models more similar to metapopulation (patch colonization) models. Another important difference is that the “attack rate” is now an infection rate, which may not show handling time limitations and thus may be best modeled as Type I functional response.