### CHAPTER 7 The fundamentals of competitive interactions

[M]ultispecies stable equilibrial coexistence requires interspecific tradeoffs. If a species arose that was able to avoid such tradeoffs and be a superior competitor relative to all other species, it would eliminate its competitors. -- David Tilman, 2007: 93

One hill cannot shelter two tigers. -- Chinese proverb



Ecologists have long viewed interspecific competition as a major (perhaps the major) factor influencing community structure. In Chapter 1, for example, we saw how Gause’s competitive exclusion principle provided a foundation for the development of later ideas about the role of interspecific competition and limiting similarity in determining the number of coexisting species. At about the same time that Gause (1934) was conducting his experiments on competitive exclusion, Alfred Lotka (1925) and Vito Volterra (1926) independently developed the first mathematical theory of interspecific competition, based on a simple extension of the logistic model of population growth. In this chapter, we will examine the working principles of interspecific competition. Much as we did in our discussion of predator–prey interactions, we will use simple mathematical theory and isocline analysis to develop this understanding. Although we will begin with the classic Lotka– Volterra (L–V) model, we will devote most of our time to studying a more recent modeling approach that explicitly considers the interactions between species and their resources. The following chapter relaxes some of the restrictive assumptions of simple competition theory and examines in more detail the mechanisms that can promote species coexistence in competitive environments.



#### Defining interspecific competition

It is difficult to come up with a rigorous and succinct definition of interspecific competition. Two definitions highlight the essentials:

*[Interspecific competition] is the interaction occurring between species when increased abundance of a first species causes the population growth of a second to decrease, and there is a reciprocal effect of the second on the first. (Grover 1997, p. 11.)*

*Interspecific competition between two species occurs when individuals of one species suffer a reduction in growth rate from a second species due to their shared use of limiting resources (exploitative competition) or active interference (interference competition). (Case 2000, p. 311)*

Both definitions note that interspecific competition involves a reduction in the population growth rate of one species due to the presence of one (or more) other species. The definition by Case outlines the two general classes of mechanisms that may cause a competitive reduction in growth rate. **Exploitative competition** (also known as resource competition) occurs when a species consumes a shared resource that limits its and other species’ population growth— thus making that resource less available to the other species. Interference competition (or contest competition) occurs when one species restricts another species’ access to a limiting resource. Interference competition may involve overt aggression between individuals (e.g., territorial defense), or it may simply involve occupying a space to the exclusion of another individual. We will examine the definition of a limiting resource in more detail later in this chapter. First, however, we will consider the classic L–V model of interspecific competition.



#### The Lotka–Volterra competition model

Recall from the discussion of the logistic equation in Chapter 4 that we can write equations for the change in abundance of two species whose populations are growing according to a logistic model as

[Eqn 7.1]

[Eqn 7.2]

where (N1, N2) are the densities of species 1 and 2, respectively, (r1, r2) are their intrinsic growth rates, and (K1, K2) are their carrying capacities. Intraspecific competition is implicit in this formulation of population growth because the density of each species cannot exceed its carrying capacity, and the per capita rate of population growth (dN/Ndt) declines linearly with population density (see Figure 4.4C). To examine the competitive effect of species 2 on species 1 (and vice versa), Lotka (1925) and Volterra (1926) incorporated into the logistic equation a term for the density of the competing species and multiplied this density term by a constant (αij), the competition coefficient. Equations 7.3 and 7.4 represent the L–V competition model for two species:

[Eqn 7.3]

[Eqn 7.4]

The **competition coefficient** αij is the effect of an individual of species j on the per capita growth rate of species i relative to the effect of an individual of i on its own per capita growth rate (and vice versa for α ji). Note that there is an implicit constant of 1 in front of the density term for the species whose growth rate is being modeled. The model can be extended to include as many species as desired by adding more terms of the form α ijNj in the numerator of species i’s growth Equation.

Note that the L–V model does not specify the mechanism of competition between the species; it simply states that the density of one species has a negative effect on the population growth rate of the second species. Negative effects in the L–V model could be the result of direct aggression between competitors, or they could be the result of indirect interactions through consumption of a shared resource (MacArthur 1970). The L–V model is a phenomenological description of competition. Later in this chapter, we will consider a more mechanistic model of exploitative competition that explicitly incorporates resource consumption. For now, however, we can use the L–V model and simple isocline analysis to develop an understanding of the potential outcomes of two-species competition. This approach is very similar to the one used for predator–prey interactions in Chapter 5. Chapter 5 plotted the zero growth isoclines for predator and prey on a single graph, then examined the regions of population densities that yielded positive and negative growth rates to predict the outcome of the predator–prey interaction under different conditions (model assumptions). Much the same thing can be done for interspecific competition by solving Equations 7.3 and 7.4 for points where the per capita growth rates of species 1 and species 2 are zero.

The combination of densities of species 1 and species 2 that results in a zero per capita growth rate for species 1 can be found by setting dN dt 1 = 0/ in Equation 7.3; likewise, for species 2 by setting dN dt 2 = 0/ in Equation 7.4. Graphing this combination of densities on a plot whose axes are N1 and N2 yields a zero growth isocline for each species (Figure 7.1). At each point along the species’ zero growth isocline, its population is at equilibrium and its density is unchanging. Taking species 1 as an example (Figure 7.1A), we know that its population growth rate will be zero when its density is at its carrying capacity (K1). Species 1’s growth rate also will be zero when the density of species 2 is equivalent to the carrying capacity of species 1 (i.e., when N2 = K 1/α12). The zero growth isocline between these endpoints is linear because per capita density dependence is linear in the model. Densities below the isocline in Figure 7.1A result in positive growth of species 1, whereas densities above the isocline result in its negative growth. You can follow the same logic to construct the zero growth isocline for species 2 (Figure 7.1B).

Plotting the zero growth isoclines for species 1 and species 2 on the same graph yields four possible outcomes (Figure 7.2). When the isocline for species 1 is above the isocline for species 2, species 1 wins in competition and excludes species 2 (Figure 7.2A). We can understand this outcome by considering the population growth trajectories of the species in each of the three regions of the graph defined by the isoclines. In the lower region, each species exhibits positive growth; in the upper region, each species exhibits negative growth. In the middle region, between the two isoclines, the population growth of species 2 is negative and the population growth of species 1 is positive—the result being that the density of species 1 reaches a stable equilibrium at K1 and the density of species 2 goes to zero. By the same logic, when the isocline for species 2 is above the isocline for species 1, species 1 is excluded and the density of species 2 equilibrates at K2. In order for species to coexist, their isoclines must cross.

When the species’ isoclines cross, their intersection point represents an equilibrium at which the densities of both species are positive and unchanging (Figure 7.2C,D). This equilibrium may be stable or unstable, depending on the orientation of the isoclines. When the isoclines are oriented as in Figure 7.2C, the two-species equilibrium is stable because the trajectories for both populations always point toward the equilibrium; if densities are perturbed from the equilibrium point, they will return to it. However, if the isoclines are oriented as in Figure 7.2D, the population trajectories point away from the equilibrium in two of the four quadrants. Thus, population densities in these quadrants will go to fixation at either K1 or K2; that is, either species 1 or species 2 will win. The outcome of competition in this case depends on the starting densities of species 1 and species 2—a result that is sometimes called founder control because the initially more abundant species is likely to predominate.

Figure 7.1 Zero growth isoclines for two-species Lotka–Volterra competition. (A) The combination of densities of species 1 (N1; x axis) and species 2 (N2; y axis) for which the population of species 1 shows zero growth (dN1/dt = 0). For points to the left of the isocline, the population of species 1 is increasing (right-pointing arrows). Right of the isocline, the population of species 1 is decreasing (left-pointing arrows). (B) The zero growth isocline for species 2. For points below the isocline, species 2 is increasing, and for points above the isocline, species 2 is decreasing (upward and downward pointing arrows, respectively).  

##### Another way to look at the Lotka–Volterra competition model

The isocline analysis in Figure 7.2 illustrates the four potential outcomes of two-species competition: species 1 wins; species 2 wins; stable coexistence; and unstable coexistence. However, many students find the L–V competition isoclines to be confusing. They are certainly less intuitive then the predator– prey isoclines we studied in Chapter 5, which is part of the reason why we considered predator–prey interactions first. Chesson (2000a) suggests that we can get a more intuitive understanding of the factors leading to species coexistence or competitive exclusion by writing the L–V model (Equations 7.3 and 7.4) in terms of absolute competition coefficients rather than relative competition coefficients. Following Chesson, we can write the two-species L–V competition Equations as

[Eqn 7.5]

where the quantities αii and αij are now, respectively, the absolute intraspecific competition coefficient and the absolute interspecific competition coefficient (i.e., competition coefficients that are not scaled by the species’ carrying capacities). Species coexistence occurs when each species can increase from low density in the presence of its competitor; this is the basis of the commonly used invasibility criteria for species coexistence (Chesson 2000a. In Equation 7.5, species i can increase from low density in the presence of competitor species j if αjj > αij, and species j can increase from low density in the presence of competitor species i if αii > αji. Thus, as Chesson notes, the criteria for species coexistence in this two-species competitive interaction is that α11 > α21 and α 22 > α12 or, in words, that intraspecific competition is greater than interspecific competition. That is, coexistence requires that each species have a greater negative effect on its own per capita growth rate than it does on the per capita growth rate of its competitor. Coexistence criteria are more complex in multispecies communities (Barabás et al. 2016, 2018), but species coexistence will still be favored when intraspecific competition is stronger than interspecific competition for all species pairs (Adler et al. 2018).

Figure 7.2 The four potential outcomes of two-species competition. Horizontal and vertical arrows show the trajectories of each species; diagonal arrows show the joint vectors of movement in the regions of state space defined by the two zero growth isoclines. (A) Species 1 outcompetes species 2. The equilibrium outcome when the species 1 isocline lies above the species 2 isocline is that the density of species 1 goes to its carrying capacity K1 and the density of species 2 goes to zero. (B) Species 2 outcompetes species 1. When the isocline for species 2 lies above the isocline for species 1, the density of species 2 goes to its carrying capacity K2 and that of species 1 goes to zero. (C) Stable coexistence. The isoclines cross and the population trajectories for each species point toward the equilibrium point. If densities are perturbed from the equilibrium point, they will return to it. (D) Unstable coexistence. The isoclines cross, but the population trajectories point away from the equilibrium point in two of the four quadrants. If densities are perturbed from the equilibrium point, one species or the other will win, depending on starting abundances. After Gotelli (2008). See http://communityecologybook.org/LVComp.html for an online dynamic version of this model.  

##### Modification to the Lotka–Volterra competition model

The L–V model assumes that competitive effects are linear—i.e., that the per capita growth rate of each species declines linearly with increases in its own density or the densities of its competitors. However, it is unlikely that competitive effects in nature are truly linear. Curved competition isoclines may occur for a variety of reasons (Abrams 2008). Gilpin and Ayala (1973) first proposed a simple modification of the L–V model to accommodate non-linear competitive interactions, where

[Eqn 7.6]

Although Equation 7.6 (often referred to as the “ θ-logistic model”) produces non-linear competition isoclines when θ ≠ 1, the non-linear competitive effects occur only in the intraspecific portion of the interaction. A more general approach to examining the causes and consequences of non-linear competitive effects has been advanced (in a consumer– resource competition model) by Abrams et al. (2008),  who showed that non-linear competitive interactions have important consequences for predicting evolutionary responses to competition and the limiting similarities of coexisting species.

The L–V competition model may also be extended to include many competing species. The conditions for equilibrium in multispecies L–V type models are commonly written in matrix format (Levins 1968):

K=AN*

where K is a column vector of the species’ carrying capacities, N* is a column vector of the species’ equilibrium densities, and A is a square matrix of the interaction coefficients. For the case of three competing species, the matrices would look like this:

-

The A matrix is commonly referred to as the community matrix because it specifies the intra- and interspecific per capita interaction strengths; intraspecific effects are on the diagonal and interspecific effects are on the off-diagonal (Levins 1968; Vandermeer 1970; MacArthur 1972). This matrix approach can be broadly applied to multispecies communities in which the interactions between species are governed by generalized L–V models that may include competition, predation, or positive effects (see Case 2000 for a clear presentation of this approach).

The community matrix provides an elegant way to analyze the equilibrium outcome of competition among many species (Levins 1968; Yodzis 1989) and it has been used extensively by theorists to explore the effects of interspecific competition on questions of community stability (e.g., May 1973a), community invasibility (e.g., Case 1990; Law and Morton 1996), and the equilibrium number of coexisting species (e.g., Vandermeer 1972). However, applications of the community matrix to natural systems have been rare (e.g., Seifert and Seifert 1976) for two important reasons.

First, this approach assumes that interactions between pairs of competing species are unaffected by the other species in the community (i.e., that the competition coefficients in the A matrix are independent of each other and thus species effects are additive). This is unlikely to be the case in nature (Neill 1974; Abrams 1983a). Non-additive (non-linear) effects are often referred to as higher-order interactions or interaction modifications (Neill 1974; Wootton 1994). The trait-mediated interactions that we examined in Chapter 6 are examples of higherorder interactions in predator–prey systems; we will discuss some of the factors causing higherorder interactions in competitive systems in later chapters on ecological networks and food webs. Secondly, in any reasonably diverse community, it is a challenge to estimate all the competition coefficients (the α’s in the A matrix). In a community of 10 species, for example, there are 45 unique pairwise species interactions. Thus, although generalized L–V models and the community matrix continue to be useful theoretical tools, they have severe limitations when applied to natural communities. More recent models that explicitly incorporate resources into the mechanics of competition have come to the forefront, in part because they provide a stronger connection to empirical work. These consumer– resource models are the subject of the next section.  



#### Consumer–resource models of competition

The L–V model shows that species coexistence and competitive effects depend critically on the relative strengths of intraspecific and interspecific competition. The L–V model does not explicitly include resources, however, and thus is of limited value in understanding exploitative competition, or in providing predictions that can be directly tested by manipulating resources. To better study exploitative competition, we need a model that incorporates how competing consumers affect their resources and how consumer population growth rates are in turn affected by resource densities.

MacArthur (1968, 1970, 1972) was the first to include resource dynamics in a model of competition for multiple resources (although Volterra had examined the case of competition for a single resource much earlier). Subsequent models were developed by May (1971), Phillips (1973), Schoener (1974, 1976), León and Tumpson (1975), and others. These pioneering efforts helped shift the focus away from the phenomenological L–V model and toward more mechanistic models of exploitative competition.

It was the graphical portrayal of consumer– resource competition models, however, that made the results of this theory accessible to most ecologists. León and Tumpson (1975) introduced a graphical analysis of resource competition models and applied it to different types of resources, yielding criteria for species coexistence. Tilman (1980, 1982) refined and greatly expanded on this approach, and provided the first empirical tests of the model (Tilman 1976, 1977). The presentation that follows is based on a graphical analysis by Tilman (1980, 1982), which has been widely used and extended to other contexts (e.g., Grover 1997; Chase and Leibold 2003b). This simple graphical approach is less robust than the mathematical theory behind it. However, it is a useful heuristic tool, and students of community ecology should be familiar with it. For an alternative verbal explanation of the essence of exploitative competition, as well as a detailed mathematical analysis, readers should consult Abrams (1988).

##### What are resources?

Species compete when they share a resource whose availability in the environment limits a species’ population growth. But what is a resource? Here are two definitions:

*A resource [is] any substance or factor which can lead to increased [population] growth rates as its availability in the environment is increased, and which is consumed by an organism. (Tilman 1982, p. 11.)*

*Resources are entities which contribute positively to population growth, and are consumed in the process. (Grover 1997, p. 1)*

Note the two properties that define a **resource**:

• a resource contributes positively to the growth rate of the consumer population;

• a resource is consumed (and is thus made unavailable to other individuals or species).

Resources may be further classified as biotic (living and self-reproducing) or abiotic (non-living), a distinction that is important when thinking about how resources are supplied. Examples of abiotic resources include mineral nutrients (e.g., nitrogen, phosphorus), light, and space. Biotic resources include prey (for predators), plants (for herbivores), and seeds (for granivores). Although space is often considered a resource for sessile species such as barnacles and plants, procuring space may simply be a prerequisite for obtaining other resources (e.g., light, nutrients, planktonic prey); thus, thinking about space as a resource can be complicated. Finally, some things that are not resources include temperature (temperature may affect population growth rates, but it is not generally altered by the organism whose growth is affected) and oxygen (oxygen is consumed by heterotrophs, but it is generally not limiting to population growth, at least not in terrestrial ecosystems).  

##### One consumer and one resource: the concept of R*

For most organisms, the per capita rate of population growth has an upper bound, which is approached in an asymptotic fashion as the abundances of all potentially limiting resources become high enough (Figure 7.3). This pattern of population growth can be described by a variety of mathematical functions [e.g., the Monod (1950) equation first developed for bacteria growing on organic substrates]. However, for heuristic purposes, we can skip the formal mathematics and simply graph the per capita birth rate of a consumer population as a positive, decelerating function of the availability of a resource R (Figure 7.4A). If we assume that the consumer population experiences some per capita densityindependent mortality rate m (represented by the horizontal line in Figure 7.3A), then the consumer population will be at equilibrium (dN/dt = 0), where the lines in Figure 7.4A intersect. This intersection point specifies the resource availability (R*) at which the consumer’s per capita birth rate (b) equals its per capita mortality rate (m). Thus, R* is the minimum equilibrium resource requirement needed to maintain a consumer population experiencing a given mortality rate (m). The R\* result is not dependent on the assumption of density-independent mortality, but we make that assumption here for simplicity in graphic presentation.

If a consumer is introduced to an environment with mortality rate m and R > R*, the consumer population will increase over time, and the abundance of the resource will decline, eventually reaching R*, the point at which both consumer and resource are at their equilibrium values (Figure 7.4B). For abiotic resources, R\* generally defines a stable equilibrium point (Grover 1997; but see Abrams 1989 for exceptions); for biotic resources, the stability of the equilibrium depends on the specific functions used to describe the consumer and resource growth responses (Hsu et al. 1977; Armstrong and McGehee 1980). For now, we will assume that a stable equilibrium between the consumer and its resource is possible.

##### Two consumers competing for one resource

Now consider a second consumer species that also requires resource R. We can examine the outcome of this interaction (i.e., two species competing for one resource) by graphing the per capita birth rates of both consumer species as functions of resource availability (Figure 7.5A). For simplicity, we will assume that both species have the same per capita mortality rate (m) (we will relax this assumption in a minute). Figure 7.5B shows the population dynamics of the two species, starting with low consumer densities and abundant resources. Initially, N 1’s population grows faster, because at high resource levels its net rate of population growth (birth rate minus mortality rate) is higher. However, as resources are consumed and R declines, the growth rate of N1’s population slows, reaching zero when resource levels reach R* 1. If N1 was the only consumer species present, the system would equilibrate when R = R*1. The situation changes, however, when N2 is present. As we can see in Figure 7.5A, N2’s birth rate is greater than its mortality rate at R = R*1. Thus, its population will grow and continue to deplete R until R = R*2 (Figure 7.5B). When R = R* 2, N2’s birth rate matches its mortality rate (Figure 7.4A), and N2’s population growth ceases. Note, however, that R*2 < R*1. Therefore, N1 cannot maintain its population at a resource level equal to R*2, and its population declines over time.

Eventually, N1 is eliminated by competition with N2 (Figure 7.5B).

The analysis in Figure 7.5 suggests the following results:

• two species cannot coexist on one limiting resource;

• the species that can maintain positive population growth at the lowest resource level (lowest R*) will win in competition.

Hsu et al. (1977, 1978) and Armstrong and McGehee (1980) showed that we need to modify these results slightly to the following:

• two species cannot coexist on one limiting resource at constant population densities;

• the species with the lowest R\* will win.

This **R* rule** provides a powerful and intuitively satisfying way to think about the outcome of competition for a single limiting resource.

Figure 7.3 Examples of resource-dependent consumer population growth rates. Note that as resource availability rises in each case, the increase in growth rate reaches an asymptote. (A) Vegetative growth rates (measured as aboveground biomass) for four grass species as functions of soil nitrogen availability (R). (B) Population growth rates of two rotifer species (Brachionus) as functions of food (algal) concentration (R). B. rubens and B. calyciflorus were fed on the algae Chlamydomonas sphaeroides (above) and Monoraphidium minutum (below). (A) After Tilman and Wedin (1991a); (B) after Rothhaupt (1988).  

Figure 7.4 Graphic representation of a one consumer–one resource system. (A) The per capita birth rate (b) of the consumer is a positive, decelerating function of the availability of the resource (R), and the per capita mortality rate (m) is constant. (B) Change in consumer (N ) and resource (R) abundances over time. The consumer population will increase and the abundance of the resource will decline, eventually reaching R*.  

Figure 7.5 Graphic representation of two consumers competing for one limiting resource. (A) The per capita birth rates (b1, b2) and per capita mortality rate (m1,2) for consumer species N1 and N2 as a function of resource availability (R). Note that consumer species N2 can maintain its population on a lower resource level than can consumer species N1 (R*2 < R*1). (B) Change in consumer and resource abundances over time. Note that consumer species N1 is driven extinct by competition with consumer species N2. See http:// communityecologybook.org/conres.html for a dynamic online version of this model.  

In the example above, it is assumed that each species had the same fixed mortality rate m. However, different morality rates can easily be incorporate into the graphic analysis. We can also consider how differences between consumer species’ reproductive rates may affect the outcome of competition. In Figure 7.5, the species’ birth rate curves cross, such that one species has a relatively greater population growth rate at low resource levels and the other species has a relatively greater population growth rate at high resource levels. These two consumer types have been termed gleaners and opportunists, respectively (Frederickson and Stephanopoulos 1981; Grover 1990). Species 2 is a gleaner because it grows relatively well when the resource is scarce. Species 1 is an opportunist—it grows relatively poorly at low resource levels but grows well when resources are abundant. Thus, the reproduction curves in Figure 7.5A illustrate a trade-off that has important consequences for species coexistence.

##### Coexistence on a single, fluctuating resource

In a constant environment, we would expect species 2 in Figure 7.5 to win in competition because it has the lower R*. However, Armstrong and McGehee (1976, 1980; see also Koch 1974; Hsu et al. 1977, 1978) showed that we need to consider another possibility. If resource levels fluctuate between high and low abundance, then the two species may coexist because species 1 has a growth advantage at high resource abundance and species 2 has a growth advantage at low resource abundance. If R is an abiotic resource, then exogenous temporal variation in the physical environment (i.e., seasons) may cause fluctuations in resource abundance and allow the species to coexist (Grover 1997). If R is a biotic resource, then the interaction between consumers and resources (think predators and their prey) may generate endogenous temporal variation in resource abundance that may also allow species coexistence (Armstrong and McGehee 1980). Recall from Chapter 5 that predator and prey populations have a natural tendency to cycle, especially when predators are efficient at exploiting their prey. Under many conditions, these fluctuations in predator and prey densities may be sustained indefinitely as a stable limit cycle (May 1973a; Nisbet and Gurney 1982).

Armstrong and McGehee (1980) showed that when predator and prey densities fluctuate in a stable limit cycle, then two (or more) predator (consumer) species may coexist indefinitely on a single resource. The conditions allowing for this coexistence are:

• one of the species’ resource-dependent growth functions (or equivalently, their functional responses) must be non-linear (as in Figure 7.5);

• there must be a trade-off between performance at high and low resource levels (i.e., the species with the higher growth rate at low resource densities experiences a lower growth rate at high resource densities—the gleaner–opportunist trade-off).

Chesson (2000a) refers to this coexistence mechanism as relative non-linearity. Abrams (2004b) further examined the effects of temporal resource fluctuations on species coexistence and showed that species coexistence is most easily promoted when the superior competitor causes fluctuations in a biotic resource, but the inferior competitor is not affected as much by those fluctuations. Levins (1979) called this “consuming the variance” because the species who benefits the most from variation in the resource must decrease this variation more than its competitor to allow coexistence. Grover (1997) reviewed some empirical examples of microorganisms that appeared to coexist via temporal fluctuations in the density of a single resource. More recently, Letten et al. (2018) showed experimentally that relative non-linearity promoted coexistence in a laboratory system of competing nectar yeasts. As it turns out, relative non-linearity is one component of a broader class of mechanisms by which environmental variation may affect coexistence, which we explore in more detail in Chapter 8.



#### Competition for multiple resources

We can extend the graphic analysis of exploitative competition outlined in the previous section to the case of two species competing for two limiting resources, thereby gaining insight into the nature of competition for multiple resources. The graphic treatment that follows is based on Tilman’s (1982) analysis; rigorous mathematical treatments of the results can be found in Hsu et al. (1981) and Butler and Wolkowicz (1987). Tilman considered many different types of resources in his analysis, but most studies of exploitative competition have focused on either essential or substitutable resources, and we will limit our consideration to these two resource types. Essential resources are required for growth and one essential resource cannot substitute for another. For example, plants require about 20 different mineral resources (e.g., nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium) in order to grow and reproduce. On the other hand, if one resource can take the place of another, each is considered a substitutable resource. For example, any one of several different prey species (e.g., rabbits, squirrels, or mice) may provide a complete diet for a carnivore. A more extensive discussion of resource types may be found in León and Tumpson (1975), Tilman (1982), and Grover (1997). Elser et al. (2007) and Harpole et al. (2011) provide discussions and examples of nutrient co-limitation and other synergistic interactions between multiple limiting resources.

##### Competition for two essential resources

Let’s assume that the environment contains two essential resources, R1 and R2, whose abundances we can graph on the x and y axes, respectively (Figure 7.6). Given a consumer with some density-independent mortality rate, we can plot the levels of R1 and R2 at which the consumer’s per capita birth rate matches its per capita mortality rate and its population is at equilibrium (i.e., dN1/dt = 0). These points define the consumer’s zero net growth isocline (or in common shorthand, its ZNGI; Tilman 1982). For essential resources, the ZNGI is represented by straight lines that run parallel to both axes of the graph, forming an L-shaped curve. At all points along the ZNGI, the consumer population is at equilibrium. At resource levels below the ZNGI, the consumer population goes extinct (birth rate < mortality rate). At resource levels above the ZNGI, the consumer population increases (birth rate > mortality rate).

Note that, for essential resources, there is a level of each resource at which any further increase in abundance will not increase the consumer population’s growth rate (i.e., growth rate is limited by the availability of the other essential resource). In Figure 7.6, the consumer population is limited by the availability of R2 at points along the ZNGI to the right of the corner of the L-shaped curve; at points along the ZNGI above the corner, the consumer population is limited by the availability of R1. As mentioned previously, the consumer’s ZNGI represents the resource levels at which its population is unchanging. More information is needed, however, to determine whether the system as a whole is at equilibrium (i.e., both consumer and resource populations are unchanging). As Tilman (1982, p. 61) noted,

*[F]our pieces of information are needed to predict the equilibrium outcomes of resource competition. These are the reproductive or growth response of each species to the resource, the mortality rate experienced by each species, the supply rate of each resource, and the consumption rate of each resource by each species. An equilibrium occurs when the resource dependent reproduction of each species exactly balances its mortality and when resource supply exactly balances total resource consumption for each resource.*  

Figure 7.6 The zero net growth isocline (ZNGI) for a consumer species feeding on two essential resources (R1, R2). S is the resource supply point, representing the availability of resources R1 and R2 in the environment if there were no consumers. The rates at which R 1 and R2 are consumed are indicated by consumption vectors (C); solid arrows pointing from the ZNGI toward the resource axes); four of many possible consumption vectors are shown here. The slope of each of the consumption vectors is the ratio of R2:R1 consumed, and this ratio is determined by the traits of the consumer. The rate of resource supply is indicated by the supply vectors (dashed lines), which point from the ZNGI toward the resource supply point, S. Resource consumption matches resource supply when the consumption and supply vectors are directly opposed (at point U ). At this point, consumer and resource populations are in equilibrium. Note that at the equilibrium point U in this example, the consumer population is limited by the availability of resource 2.  

The ZNGI defines the conditions (i.e., abundances of R 1 and R2) under which the consumer’s reproductive rate balances it mortality rate. Thus, we have half of the information we need to determine the outcome of competition. Next, we need to consider the dynamics of the two resources, R1 and R2.

Resources will be at equilibrium when the rate of consumption by the consumer matches the rate of resource supply. We can represent consumption at any point on the ZNGI by plotting vectors pointing toward the resource axes; each of these consumption vectors (C in Figure 7.6) has a slope equal to the relative amounts of R 1 and R2 consumed. Think of these consumption vectors as indicating the rate and direction in which the consumer is drawing down the two resources. Counterbalancing consumption is the rate at which resources are supplied, which can be represented as a vector pointing toward the resource supply point (S in Figure 7.6)— the expected standing stock of resources 1 and 2 in the absence of consumption. At one and only one point (U in Figure 7.6) along the consumer’s ZNGI is the consumption vector in exact opposition to the supply vector. At this point, the system is at equilibrium. Resource consumption matches resource supply, and (because the equilibrium point is on the consumer ZNGI) the consumer’s birth rate matches its death rate. For abiotic resources, the equilibrium point is stable (León and Tumpson 1975; Tilman 1980). For biotic resources, stability is not assured; the outcome depends on the resource growth functions and on any interactions between the resources (Grover 1997). For our goal of understanding the potential outcomes of competition for two resources, we will assume that a stable equilibrium between consumer and resources is possible at point U.

A second consumer species (N2) may be added to the system by graphing its ZNGI along with that of consumer species N1. There are four possible orientations of the consumers’ ZNGIs and their consumption vectors, and these orientations dictate the outcome of two-species competition (Tilman 1982; Grover 1997). The descriptions of these outcomes given next follow closely from Tilman (1982).

###### Species 1 wins

In Figure 7.7A, the ZNGI for species 1 is always “inside” the ZNGI for species 2 (i.e., it is closer to the origin of the graph). Therefore, species 1 requires less of both resources than species 2 in order to maintain its population at equilibrium (birth rate = mortality rate). The positions of the ZNGIs in Figure 7.7A define three regions of potential resource availabilities. Consider what would happen to species 1 and species 2 if they were introduced into an environment where the resource supply points fell within each of these regions. Environments with resource supply points in region 1 would have insufficient resources to support either consumer species (birth rate < mortality rate). Thus, both species would go extinct. In region 2, the supply of resources would be sufficient to maintain the population of species 1, but not that of species 2. Thus, only species 1 would survive in an environment whose resource supply point fell within region 2. Finally, in region 3, there would be enough resources for each species to survive by itself. However, if both species were introduced into an environment with a resource supply point in region 3, the population growth of species 1 would reduce resources to a point on species 1’s ZNGI, which is below the ZNGI of species 2. Therefore, species 1 would outcompete and exclude species 2.

###### Species 2 wins

In Figure 7.7B, the ZNGI for species 2 is always “inside” the ZNGI for species 1. As in Figure 7.6A, the winner of the competition will be the species that can tolerate the lowest level of resource supply. Neither species can survive in environments with resource supply points in region 1, only species 2 can survive in region 2, and species 2 will outcompete species 1 in region 3.

###### Species 1 and 2 coexist at a stable equilibrium point

In Figure 7.7C, the ZNGIs for the two species cross. The point at which the two ZNGIs cross is a 2-species equilibrium point because at this point, each species’ birth rate matches its mortality rate. Whether this equilibrium point is stable or not depends in part on the orientation of the consumption vectors for each species. (Note that the outcomes of competition in the cases represented by Figure 7.7A,B are unaffected by the orientation of the species’ consumption vectors, and therefore we did not include consumption vectors in those graphs.) In Figure 7.7C, the species’ ZNGIs and consumption vectors define six regions into which resource supply points may fall. Environments with resource supply points that fall in region 1 have insufficient resources to maintain populations of either species. Supply points that fall in region 2 are sufficient to maintain species 1, but not species 2. Likewise, supply points that fall in region 6 can maintain species 2, but not species 1. Regions 3–5 have supply points that could potentially maintain either species when growing alone.  

Figure 7.7 Graphic model of two species competing for two essential resources (R1, R2), showing four outcomes of resource competition. (A) Species 1’s ZNGI lies inside species 2’s ZNGI; species 1 outcompetes species 2. (B) Species 2’s ZNGI lies inside species 1’s ZNGI; species 2 outcompetes species 1. (C,D) The ZNGIs for species 1 and 2 cross. The intersection of the ZNGIs defines an equilibrium point at which the densities of species 1 and species 2 are unchanging (i.e., births = deaths for both species). C1 and C2 are the consumption vectors for the two species. (C) The equilibrium point is locally stable because each species consumes more of the resource that most limits its own growth. For environments with resource supply points in region 4, species 1 and species 2 coexist. (D) Consumption vectors for the two species are reversed from those in (C); the equilibrium point is unstable because each species consumes more of the resource that most limits the growth of the other species. For environments with resource supply points in region 4, the outcome of competition depends on initial conditions, and either species 1 or species 2 may win. After Tilman (1982). See http://communityecologybook.org/conres2.html for an online dynamic version of this model.  

In competition, however, species 1 will exclude species 2 from environments with resource supply points that fall in region 3, because species 1 will draw resources down to its own ZNGI and to the left of the two-species equilibrium point (a point at which species 2 cannot survive). Likewise, species 2 will exclude species 1 from environments with resource supply points that fall within region 5. Environments characterized by resource supply points that fall in region 4 may support the stable coexistence of both species 1 and species 2 because the joint consumption of resources by both species will draw resource availabilities down to the equilibrium point, where the ZNGIs intersect. This twospecies equilibrium point is locally stable because at this point, each species consumes proportionally more of the resource that most limits its own growth (León and Tumpson 1975; Tilman 1980). To see this, note that at the equilibrium point in Figure 7.7C, species 1 consumes relatively more of resource 2 (as shown by the slope of its consumption vector), and at the equilibrium point the growth of species 1 is limited by the availability of resource 2. Similar logic can be applied to species 2 at the equilibrium point.

###### Species 1 and 2 coexist, but the equilibrium point is unstable

Figure 7.7D is similar to Figure 7.7C in that the ZNGIs for the two species cross. However, the consumption vectors for the two species are reversed from those in Figure 7.7C. This reversal causes the two-species equilibrium point to be locally unstable. At equilibrium, species 1 is limited by resource 2 and species 2 is limited by resource 1. However, the slopes of the consumption vectors show that species 1 consumes relatively more of resource 1 and species 2 consumes relatively more of resource 2. Thus, at the equilibrium point, each species consumes relatively more of the resource that most limits the growth of the other species, not the resource that most limits its own growth. This situation causes the equilibrium to be unstable; any deviation away from the equilibrium point will be magnified over time until either species 1 or species 2 outcompetes the other. Thus, environments with resource supply points in region 4 will lead to dominance by either species 1 or species 2 (and the extinction of the other species); the winner depends on the starting conditions. Environments with resource supply points in regions 1, 2, 3, 5, or 6 will lead to competitive outcomes identical to those in Figure 7.7C.

##### Competition for two substitutable resources

If resources are perfectly substitutable, such that each resource supplies the full complement of substances required for a consumer’s growth and one resource can substitute completely for another, then the consumer ZNGIs can be represented by straight lines in resource state space (Figure 7.8). Most heterotrophs (e.g., predators) consume resources that are best viewed as substitutable. León and Tumpson (1975) suggested that a fundamental difference between competition among plants and competition among animals is the difference between essential and substitutable resources. Thus, by considering competition for essential and for substitutable resources, we have covered the two major types of exploitative competition found in natural communities. A number of factors may cause resources to be imperfectly substitutable, resulting in nonlinear ZNGIs. However, as long as the ZNGIs decrease monotonically with a decline in resource abundance, the general conclusions below will apply (Grover 1997).  

Figure 7.8 Graphic model of two species competing for two perfectly substitutable resources (R1, R2). In this example, the ZNGIs for species 1 and 2 cross, and the intersection of the ZNGIs defines an equilibrium point at which the densities of species 1 and species 2 are unchanging (i.e., births = deaths for both species). C1 and C2 are the consumption vectors for the two species. The equilibrium point is potentially stable because each species consumes more of the resource that most limits its own growth. In environments with resource supply points in region 4, species 1 and species 2 coexist. See http://communityecologybook.org/conres2.html for an online dynamic version of this model.  

If the ZNGIs of two consumer species do not intersect, then the species whose ZNGI is closest to the origin will win in competition and exclude the other species (i.e., it will have a lower R* for both resources). Thus, just as in the case of competition for essential resources, coexistence among two species competing for substitutable resources requires that the species’ ZNGIs cross (i.e., there must be a trade-off in the species’ abilities to grow on the two resources). The criteria for stable coexistence on two substitutable resources are also similar to those for essential resources, although there are some important distinctions. For substitutable resources, stable coexistence can occur if each species consumes proportionally more of the resource that most limits its own growth and if equilibrium resource densities are stable and positive (MacArthur 1972; León and Tumpson 1975; Grover 1997). In the case of biotic resources that are themselves competing, the factors determining stable positive resource populations can be complex (see discussions in Abrams 1988; Grover 1997; Abrams and Nakajima 2007).

##### Spatial heterogeneity and the coexistence of multiple consumers

The previous examples show how two species may coexist on two resources. Coexistence requires that the species’ ZNGIs cross or, in other words, that the species exhibit a trade-off in their abilities to compete for the two resources. In the example shown in Figure 7.7C, species 1 is a better competitor (has a lower R*) for resource 1, but it is a poorer competitor for resource 2. In general, stable coexistence requires that each species consume more of the resource that most limits its growth. Tilman (1980, 1982) showed how this argument can be extended to explain the coexistence of multiple species on two resources if the species follow the same trade-off curve, such that a species that is better at competing for resource 1 is inferior at competing for resource 2. In this case, there will be regions of the two-resource state space in which different pairs of species may coexist (Figure 7.9A). Moreover, if the environment varies spatially in the supply rates of the two resources, this spatial heterogeneity may allow the coexistence of multiple consumer species in the community. For example, spatial variation in resource supply could be modeled as a gradient in the supply rate of resource 1 and resource 2 (the dashed line from resource supply point y to resource supply point y’ in Figure 7.9A). In this case, competitors will be separated in space along the resource supply gradient running from y to y’ (Figure 7.9B). If spatial heterogeneity in resource supply is instead modeled as a mixture of resource patches varying in their supply rates of R1 and R2 (dashed ellipse in Figure 7.9A), then species would coexist as oneor two-species pairs intermingled in space (Tilman 1982, 2007b).  

Figure 7.9 Spatial heterogeneity in resources may promote the coexistence of multiple competing species. (A) ZNGIs for five consumer species (1–5) utilizing two resources (R1, R2). In this example, there is an interspecific trade-off such that species 1–5 are each progressively better competitors for resource 1 and progressively poorer competitors for resource 2 (i.e., species 1 is the best competitor for R2 but the worst competitor for R1). The four dots indicate two-species equilibrium points (where two species’ ZNGIs cross). The line from y to y’ represents a gradient in resource supply points (S1, S2), and the ellipse represents a habitat that has spatial heterogeneity in resource supply points. (B) Exploitative competition causes the five competing species to become separated in space along the resource supply gradient (y to y’). After Tilman (2007b).  



#### Testing the predictions of resource competition theory

One of the strengths of resource competition theory is that it provides a mechanistic link between consumers and resources, allowing us to test the theory’s predictions using measures of resource use and resource supply. In contrast, more phenomenological competition models (e.g., the Lotka–Volterra model) require estimates of the relative strengths of the interactions within and between species (the competition coefficients in the L–V model) in order to predict the long-term competitive outcomes. In the simple case of multiple species competing for a single limiting resource, resource competition theory predicts that the species with the lowest equilibrium resource requirement (R*) will exclude all other competing species. The first step in testing this prediction is to measure each species’ R*, by either:

• by growing the species in monoculture on the resource and measuring the resource concentration when the consumer and resource are at steady state;

• calculating R\* from the species’ growth kinetics (Wilson et al. 2007). When the species are then grown in mixture and allowed to compete, theory predicts that the species with the lowest R\* will win.

A number of laboratory experiments have tested the R* prediction using two species in competition for a single limiting resource (Figure 7.10 shows one example). Wilson et al. (2007) summarized the results from 43 laboratory competition studies with bacteria, phytoplankton, and zooplankton, and concluded that 41 of the studies were consistent with the R* prediction, while the two remaining studies were inconclusive. Miller et al. (2005) arrived at a somewhat different conclusion regarding support for the R* prediction after examining a smaller number of experimental studies, concluding that the results were mixed and that the theory had been insufficiently tested. Wilson et al.’s review demonstrates that “at least in competition experiments with bacteria, phytoplankton, and zooplankton, R* is almost always a good guide to competitive outcome” (Wilson et al. 2007, p. 704). However, few experiments have tested the R* prediction for a single resource outside the laboratory. One such study was done by Tilman and Wedin (1991b) and Wedin and Tilman (1993), who grew five perennial grass species in monocultures and measured their R*s for the limiting soil resource (nitrogen), then tested the outcome of competition among species in pairwise experiments. In all four of the competition pairings, the species with the lowest R\* won, as predicted by the theory.

When two species compete for two limiting resources, resource competition theory predicts four potential competitive outcomes, including stable coexistence. These predictions also have been tested in the laboratory with microorganisms (e.g., Tilman 1977, 1981; Kilham 1986; Sommer 1986; Rothhaupt 1988, 1996; reviewed in Wilson et al. 2007). The results of these laboratory experiments generally support the theory (Wilson et al. 2007; see Figure 7.11 for an example). More recently, Burson et al. (2018) conducted a series of laboratory experiments examining the outcome of competition for two limiting nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorous) and light using a diverse community of 19 phytoplankton taxa (mostly classified to genus) that they collected from the North Sea and brought into the laboratory. The results of this experiment matched some of the predictions of resource competition theory, but not all. Most notably, four of the 19 taxa coexisted in all the competition treatments, whereas the other (15) taxa were competitively excluded. Different species became dominant under different resource limitations, indicative of trade-offs in competitive abilities for these resources. However, more species coexisted than predicted based on the number of limiting resources.

Figure 7.10 A test of the R* prediction for two species of freshwater phytoplankton (algae) potentially competing for a limiting nutrient. Under the conditions tested in the experiment, both algal species were limited by a single nutrient—phosphorus—and the Asterionella species had a lower R* for phosphorus than did the Cyclotella species. (A, B) Each species grew successfully in monoculture. (C) When the two species were grown in competition, Asterionella eliminated Cyclotella. After Tilman (1977).  

Figure 7.11 Tests of the predictions of resource competition theory for two rotifer species (Brachionus rubens and B. calyciflorus) competing for two algal resources (Monoraphidium and Chlamydomonas) in the laboratory. As shown in Figure 7.3B, when growing in monoculture B. rubens has the highest growth rate at all densities of Monoraphidium, while B. calyciflorus has the highest growth rate at all densities of Chlamydomonas. (A,B) Predicted outcomes (ZNGIs and consumption vectors) at two different dilution (mortality) rates (D). The two rotifers are predicted to coexist at resource concentrations defined by the sector between the dashed lines (Bc + Br). (C,D) Actual competitive outcomes. Theory correctly predicted the outcome of interspecific competition in 11 of the 12 cases. After Rothhaupt (1988).  

Dybzinski and Tilman (2007) tested the predictions of resource competition theory in the field using six perennial prairie grasses in an 11-year experiment at the Cedar Creek Reserve in Minnesota looking at competition for soil nitrogen and light. In six of the eight pairwise species combinations, the species with the lowest resource requirements won in competition. Coexistence was predicted and observed in two pairwise combinations of species. However, it was unclear whether species coexistence in these cases was due to a trade-off between competition for nitrogen and competition for light (the limiting resources). Other, more indirect tests of resource competition theory have looked for changes in species composition and in resource concentrations across ecosystems that differ naturally in the supply of limiting nutrients. Tilman (1982) found some support for the theory in the distribution of plant species across nutrient gradients in freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems, but Leibold (1997; see also Chase and Leibold 2003a) found no support for the theory’s prediction that nitrogen and phosphorus availability should covary negatively across freshwater ecosystems. Thus, predictions for two species coexisting on two limiting resources are nicely supported by laboratory studies with microorganisms, but there is only limited evidence from field experiments.

It is not surprising that nearly all the direct tests of resource competition theory have come from the laboratory and not the field. In the laboratory, the assumptions of the theory can be met far more easily, and the outcome of competition can be observed over short time scales using microorganisms. It is satisfying to see the predictions of theory generally supported under these controlled conditions. However, the paucity of field tests leaves open the question of whether the theory is useful for predicting the outcome of competitive interactions in the field or the distribution and abundance of organisms in nature (Miller et al. 2005).

It is interesting to note that Dybzinski and Tilman (2007, p. 317), the authors of one of few field tests of resource competition theory, concluded that “while competition for multiple resources might maintain some diversity in natural (plant) communities, other mechanisms are almost certainly operating to maintain the remainder.” We will consider other diversity-maintaining mechanisms in the following chapter when we expand on the study of competitive systems to include such factors as environmental variation, variable nutrient requirements, and species interactions in food webs



#### Apparent competition

We have seen that competition occurs when two or more species share a limiting resource. Species that share a predator also may have negative indirect effects on each other, an interaction that has been called apparent competition. The simple mechanism behind this negative interaction is a numerical response by a predator to its prey: an increase in the abundance of one prey species may lead to an increase in predator abundance, which in turn may have a negative effect on the abundance of other prey species that the predator consumes. The predator’s numerical response may be behavioral and occur quickly (e.g., predators may aggregate in areas of high prey density), or it may result from slower demographic processes (e.g., predator numbers increase due to higher birth rates or lower death rates in response to increased prey density).

MacArthur (1970, p. 21) noted the potential for shared predation to lead to negative indirect effects on prey species; however, it was Holt (1977) who developed the theory and explored its consequences for species coexistence (see Holt and Bonsall 2017 for a comprehensive review). Holt referred to the negative effect of shared predation as “apparent competition” because the negative interaction between species sharing a predator resembles the negative interaction between species sharing a limiting resource (exploitative competition). Apparent competition has the potential to be a strong interaction in most food webs. In a survey of 23 marine intertidal communities, Menge (1995) found that apparent competition occurred in about 25% of the food webs studied (which made it the second most common indirect effect).

It is possible to understand the action of apparent competition by using a version of the simple predator–prey models developed in Chapter 5. Following Holt et al. (1994), we can define the population growth rates for two prey species i (i = 1, 2) as 

[Eqn 7.7]

where Ni is the abundance of prey species i, ri is the intrinsic growth rate for prey species i, P is the abundance of the predator, and ai is the predator’s attack rate on prey species i (number of prey eaten per predator, per prey). You should recognize Equation 7.7 as a multispecies version of the familiar L–V model of predator–prey dynamics (see Equation 5.5).

Like the L–V model, Equation 7.7 assumes no self-limitation in the prey population and assumes that the predator has a linear functional response. We can define the population growth rate for the predator as

[Eqn 7.8]

where fi is the number of predators born as a result of the consumption of each prey item and q is the predator’s density-independent death rate. Equation 7.8 differs from the standard L–V formulation for the predator population (e.g., Equation 5.7) in that it includes terms for the rates of immigration (I) and emigration (E) of predators. Holt et al. (1994) included an immigration rate for the predator to help stabilize the predator’s population dynamics. For the present purposes, there is no need to be concerned with these predator migration terms in order to understand the impact of apparent competition on species interactions.

In the simple model described above, the prey species that dominates in apparent competition is the species that withstands (and maintains) the highest density of the shared predator relative to other prey species. This can be seen by noting that the per capita rate of change in the prey population is

[Eqn 7.9]

Thus, prey species i will have a positive per capita growth rate when dNi/Nidt > 0, which is true when r i > aiP* (where P\* is the equilibrium density of predators in the system). The prey species that can maintain a positive population growth rate at the highest equilibrium predator density, defined as

[Eqn 7.10]

will exclude all other prey species from the system. Holt et al. (1994) labeled this statement the 

P* rule. The P* rule is analogous to the R* rule for interspecific competition, which states that the species able to maintain its population at the lowest resource level (R*) will dominate all other species when competing for a single resource. Likewise, when two (or more) species share a common predator, the winning species will be the one that can maintain its population at the highest density of predators (P*). Equation 7.10 emphasizes the two attributes that allow prey species to persist at high predator densities:

• a high intrinsic growth rate for the prey (ri);

• a low vulnerability to attack by the predator (ai).

Predator preference and prey vulnerability are two major factors influencing attack rates. Abrams (1987, 2004a) and others discuss a variety of traits of predators and prey that may affect attack rates.

The impact of apparent competition between prey will be weakened when:

• the predator is not food-limited, but is limited instead by other resources (breeding sites, for example);

• prey species have spatial or temporal refuges from predation; or

• the predator exhibits **prey switching** behavior (i.e., feeding preferentially on the more abundant prey; Murdoch 1969).

If predators concentrate their feeding on the most abundant prey species, then the impact of apparent competition between prey species will be reduced. Such switching behavior may even lead to a short-term indirect mutualism between prey species.

There is a well-developed theory for apparent competition that includes a number of refinements beyond the simple L–V type model presented above (e.g., Holt 1984; Abrams 1987; Holt et al. 1994; Leibold 1996; Noonburg and Byers 2005; Krivan and Eisner 2006). For many years, theory outpaced empirical examples of apparent competition, and the classic study by Schmitt (1987) on apparent competition in subtidal reef communities was often cited as one of the few field experiments showing its effect on species distributions and abundance. However, the impact of apparent competition in natural communities is now well-documented (see reviews by Chaneton and Bonsall 2000; Holt and Bonsall 2017), as is its role in applied ecology (van Veen et al. 2006). It has been applied to predator–prey and host–parasitoid interactions involving insect pests (e.g., Müller and Godfray 1997; Murdoch et al. 2003; Östman and Ives 2003), to the biocontrol of pests through predator introductions (e.g., Willis and Memmott 2005; Carvalheiro et al. 2008), and to studies of the impact of invasive species on native species (e.g., Norbury 2001; Rand and Louda 2004; Orrock et al. 2008; Oliver et al. 2009), including evolutionary and ecological effects of shared predation (e.g., Lau 2012). In both the basic and applied literature, numerous studies have noted that species interactions involving shared enemies often show asymmetrical effects—that is, one species is more strongly impacted by a shared predator than is the other (Chaneton and Bonsall 2000). This asymmetrical impact, predicted by the theory of apparent competition (Holt and Lawton 1994; Brassil and Abrams 2004), may lead to the exclusion of species from areas where they might otherwise exist (e.g., Meiners 2007; Oliver et al. 2009). Finally, species may compete for resources, as well as sharing a predator, leading in the simplest case to a diamondshaped food web that reflects a mixture of exploitative competition and apparent competition (see Figure 10.13C). Some of the consequences of this “diamond interaction web” will be explored in Chapter 10, when food webs, keystone predation, and ecosystem regulation will be discussed.



#### Conclusion

This has been quite a long chapter, yet it has only scratched the surface of a vast literature describing the conceptual foundation of interspecific competition. (Interested readers are referred to Grover 1997; Case 2000; and Chesson 2000a for further introduction.) However, despite our limited exposure to competition theory, we have learned a great deal about the nature and outcomes of interspecific competition. We have seen that both the phenomenological L–V model and the more mechanistic consumer–resource model specify general conditions for two-species competition that lead either to competitive exclusion (one species wins and the other is excluded) or to the coexistence of species (with either a stable or an unstable equilibrium point). In both models, we see that stable coexistence is predicted to be possible when intraspecific competition is stronger than interspecific competition. The consumer–resource model specifies this condition for stable coexistence mechanistically, based on the species’ relative consumption of their limiting resources. This consumer–resource model is sometimes referred to as a “resource-ratio” model of competition because the outcome of competition depends in part on the ratios of resources consumed and supplied (see Figure 7.9B). In the L–V model, when each species has a stronger effect on the growth of its competitor than it does on its own growth, the result is an unstable equilibrium and competitive displacement, with the winner determined by the initial conditions (founder control). The same outcome is predicted by the consumer– resource competition model when each species consumes more of the resource that limits the other species at the equilibrium point. Thus, an unstable equilibrium and founder control can occur when interspecific competition is stronger than intraspecific competition.

Conditions for the competitive displacement of one species by another are most easily visualized with the consumer–resource model. In the case of a single limiting resource, the species with the lowest R\* wins and excludes the other species. In the case of two species competing for two resources, the winner will be the species whose ZNGI falls inside that of the other species (i.e., the species that can maintain a population on a lower level of both resources). Conditions for competitive exclusion in the L–V model are less intuitive, being expressed as the ratios of the species’ competition coefficients and carrying capacities.

The rule that coexistence of n competing species requires at least n limiting resources (or n limiting factors) may be relaxed if resources are allowed to vary spatially or temporally (Grover 1997). It is important to note that species coexistence via temporal or spatial resource heterogeneity requires trade-offs in the abilities of different species to use resources. In the case of temporal variation in resource availability (driven by either exogenous or endogenous factors; e.g., limit cycles), species coexistence requires a trade-off such that species that grow relatively well when resources are rare (“gleaners”) grow relatively poorly when resources are abundant (and “opportunist” species do the reverse). This trade-off can be expressed as a crossing in the species’ nonlinear resource-dependent growth functions (e.g., Figure 7.5A). Chapter 14 will examine how temporal variation in the environment may promote species coexistence by another mechanism, the “storage effect” (Chesson 2000a).

In the case of spatial resource heterogeneity, coexistence of multiple species requires a trade-off in a species’ ability to grow on different resources (e.g., Figure 7.9A). As Tilman (2007b, p. 93) notes, “Except for the diversity explanation based on neutrality (Hubbell 2001), all other explanations for the high diversity of life on Earth require tradeoffs.” The concept of trade-offs is fundamental to ecology, and ecological trade-offs in a variety of contexts will be considered in later chapters. Although interspecific trade-offs are required for stable, equilibrial species coexistence, we will see in later chapters that equalizing mechanisms can make species coexistence easier to achieve (Chesson 2000a). Equalizing and stabilizing mechanisms of species coexistence will be examined in more detail in Chapter 8, and one particular model of species coexistence via equalizing mechanisms will be considered (Hubbell’s neutral theory, alluded to in Tilman’s quote above) in detail in Chapter 14.



#### Summary

1. Interspecific competition is an interaction between species in which an increased abundance of one species causes the population growth of another species to decrease. Exploitative competition (resource competition) occurs when a species consumes a shared resource that limits its own and other species’ population growth, thus making that resource less available to other species. Interference competition (contest competition) is when a species restricts another species’ access to a limiting resource.

2. The L–V competition model shows that twospecies competition has four potential outcomes—species 1 wins; species 2 wins; stable coexistence; or unstable coexistence. The criterion for stable species coexistence in the L-V model is that each species has a greater negative effect on its own per capita growth rate than it does on the per capita growth rate of its competitor. The L–V competition model is a “phenomenological model” in that it does not specify the mechanism by which one species has a negative effect on another.

3. The L–V competition model may be extended to include more than two competing species by using a community matrix approach. Although theorists have made extensive use of the community matrix approach to study multispecies communities, this approach is difficult to apply to natural communities and generally fails to take higher-order interactions into account.

4. Consumer–resource competition models mechanistically link the outcome of interspecific competition to the consumption of resources, specifying how competing consumers affect their resources and how consumer population growth rates are affected by resource abundances.

5. Resources are entities which contribute positively to the growth rate of the consumer population and which are consumed. Essential resources are those required for an individual’s growth and survival; one essential resource cannot substitute for another. If one resource can take the place of another, each one is considered a substitutable resource.

6. R* is the minimum amount of a resource R that consumer species N requires to maintain a stable population at a given mortality rate. At R*, the consumer’s per capita birth rate matches its per capita mortality rate and its population is unchanging.

7. The R\* rule in consumer-resource competition models states that:

• two species cannot coexist on one limiting resource (at constant densities);

• the species that can maintain positive population growth at the lowest resource abundance (lowest R*) will win in competition.

8. If resource abundance fluctuates over time, two species may coexist on a single limiting resource if species 1 has a growth advantage at high resource abundance (“opportunist” species) and species 2 has a growth advantage at low resource abundance (“gleaner” species). Such trade-offs between species types can have important consequences for species coexistence.

9. The abundances of two resources at which a consumer population will be at equilibrium can be plotted as that consumer’s zero net growth isocline (ZNGI). At resource levels below the ZNGI, the consumer goes extinct. At resource levels above the ZNGI, the consumer population increases. If a ZNGI for a second consumer species is added to such a plot, we see that the consumer that can survive at the lower level of resources wins in competition.

10. Two consumer species can coexist on two resources at a stable equilibrium if the species’ ZNGI’s intersect and at the intersection point each species consumes proportionally more of the resource that most limits its own growth. The equilibrium is unstable, however, if each species consumes relatively more of the resource that most limits the growth of the other species.
11. Spatial heterogeneity in the supply of resources within a community can allow more than two species to coexist on two limiting resources.
12. One of the strengths of resource competition theory is that the theory’s predictions can be tested using measures of resource supply and species resource use. Laboratory experiments with microorganisms support many of the theory’s predictions. However, field tests of the theory are few and their results are more equivocal, suggesting that species coexistence in nature depends on multiple mechanisms.
13. Apparent competition occurs when two (or more) species share a predator and an increase in the abundance of one prey species leads to an increase in shared predator abundance, which may have an indirect negative effect on the abundance of other prey species. The prey species that can maintain its own population at the highest density of the shared predator is favored under apparent competition.