### CHAPTER 8 Species coexistence and niche theory



The steady state of a mixed population consisting of two species occupying an identical ‘ecological niche’ will be the pure population of one of them, of the better adapted for the particular set of conditions 

Georgy Gause 1937



The Paradox of the Plankton:. . .The problem that is presented by the phytoplankton is essentially how it is possible for a number of species to coexist in a relatively. . .unstructured environment all competing for the same sorts of materials. 

G. Evelyn Hutchinson 1961, p. 137



Stable coexistence . . . requires important ecological differences between species that we may think of as distinguishing their niches. . .[along] four axes: resources, predators (and other natural enemies), time, and space. 

Peter Chesson, 2000a, p. 348



Gause’s competitive exclusion principle is encapsulated in the first quote above. As covered in Chapter 7, the theoretical and empirical foundations for this principle are strong. Yet, a freshwater lake may contain 30 or more species of phytoplankton, a coral reef a hundred or more species of fish, and a single hectare of tropical rainforest over 300 species of trees. And as every farmer knows, it takes enormous effort to keep a crop free of weeds. It seems that nature abhors a monoculture as much as it does a vacuum. Ecologists have long puzzled over this wealth of biodiversity in the face of the competitive exclusion principle, especially in situations where the number of available niches seems inadequate to account for the coexistence of so many species (e.g., Hutchinson 1961; Sale 1977; Hubbell and Foster 1986). Hutchinson (1961) was the first to express this dilemma formally. In a paper entitled “The paradox of the plankton,” he asked how so many species of freshwater phytoplankton, all of which require the same few limiting resources, coexist in an environment that appears to have little habitat structure (the open water of a lake). We now know that there are many more opportunities for niche partitioning among phytoplankton species than Hutchinson or others envisioned at the time. Phytoplankton, for example, may require different ratios of nutrients (Tilman 1982; Sommer 1989), may use different wavelengths of light (Stomp et al. 2004), and may suffer different rates of mortality from grazers (McCauley and Briand 1979). But is this enough to explain the coexistence of 30 species of phytoplankton in one lake? Ecologists have devoted considerable attention to these questions in recent decades under the label of “coexistence theory”. In this chapter, we will explore the answers modern coexistence theory gives to Hutchinson’s “Paradox of the Plankton”.



#### Revisiting the origins of the notion of competitive exclusion

The notion of competitive exclusion as a strong law really took hold in the 1930s due to two separate events, both discussed in detail in Chapter 7:

• the development of the Lotka-Volterra model with a prediction of competitive exclusion;

• the demonstration of the correctness of this prediction by Gause in a series of laboratory experiments (Figure 1.1).

Yet everywhere we look we see more than one species, often dozens or even hundreds of species coexisting within a community (i.e., Hutchinson’s paradox of the plankton). Does that mean the interspecific competition isn’t important? No. There is a wealth of evidence showing that interspecific competition is a strong force in nature (e.g., Adler et al. 2018). Let’s begin our search for a resolution of the paradox of the plankton by revisiting the competition models presented in Chapter 7, exploring some aspects of these simple models that can affect their results:

• The Lotka–Volterra (L–V) and consumer-resource models, like all models, make assumptions that may be wrong. If the assumptions do not apply, then the conclusions also might not apply.

• The L–V equations are very phenomenological and, therefore, general, but this makes the model hard to apply to the real world and interpret. The model predicts competitive exclusion if interspecific competition is stronger than intraspecific competition, but the model does not tell us how to measure this. Several attempts, some largely unsuccessful, have been made to expand our understanding of what it means for interspecific competition to be stronger than intraspecific competition.

In the following sections, we explore how both of the points outlined above may help resolve the paradox of the plankton.



#### How are the assumptions of simple theory violated in nature?

All models make simplifying assumptions, ensuring that they are ultimately wrong or at least incomplete. Box and Draper (1987) remarked “Remember that all models are wrong; the practical question is how wrong do they have to be to not be useful.” Today, most theoreticians carefully list the assumptions of their models before proceeding to explore their results. Lotka and Volterra published their models in a different age and did not do this. In thinking about the assumptions embedded in the L–V model (see Palmer 1994 for a list), it is helpful to know that Lotka originally used very similar equations to model the dynamics of a chemical reaction involving two chemical species in a laboratory test tube (Lotka 1920) before then applying them to competing biological species. It is also helpful to remember that Gause’s successful confirmation of the L–V competition model also occurred in a system of laboratory bottles. This suggests a number of assumptions that might apply to chemicals (or microorganisms) in a test tube under controlled laboratory conditions but not to biological species in nature. Namely, both the L–V and consumer–resource models assume:

1. Environmental conditions (e.g. resource or temperature) are constant across the space studied.

2. Environmental conditions are constant through time.

3. The system is closed (no immigration from outside).

Ecologists have shown how violating any of the above assumptions may favor species coexistence. This result will now be examined in more detail.

##### Spatial variation in the environment can promote species coexistence

Perhaps the most obvious difference between simple competition theory and the real world is the assumption of spatial homogeneity in the environment. **A spatially heterogeneous environment can promote species coexistence**. We have already encountered one example in Figure 7.9, where trade-offs in ability to use multiple nutrients combined with **spatial variation in the resource supply ratio** of multiple nutrients could lead to coexistence. In nature, Lechowicz and Bell (1991) showed that, even in a seemingly homogenous beech–maple temperate forest, the forest floor has substantial variation in the availability of nitrogen and potassium even at the sub-meter scale. To put it another way, they showed there is as much variation in nutrient concentrations in a 2 m × 2 m patch of ground as there is in a 50 m × 50 m patch. Thus, it seems possible that the mechanism in Figure 7.9 might explain coexistence of forest herbs. Spatial variation in even a single resource could also allow species coexistence. For example, the variation in light on a forest floor (so called light specks). Or water consumption and variation in soil moisture that covaries with microtopography. For coexistence to be explained by variation in the availability of a single resource, tradeoffs need to be invoked. For example, there may be a trade-off between tolerance of low resources (or some other environmental stress) and competitive ability, termed the dominance–tolerance trade-off. An example of how this trade-off can lead to species coexistence is provided in Box 8.1.

Spatial heterogeneity in non-resource factors can also enhance species coexistence. Animals use vegetation structure as habitat for resting, reproduction, or predator avoidance. Thus, even though vegetation structure is not a consumed resource, its spatial variation can promote species coexistence. Insectivorous birds may reduce interspecific competition by using different habitats (e.g., grassland vs forest) and their habitat use may involve tradeoffs. For example, feather coloration for camouflage may differ between birds that live in grasslands vs birds living in a darker forest environment. The wing shapes optimized to fly in an open field and in a forest are also different. These  distinct habitat  type coexistence mechanisms work because each species spends more time in the habitat it is better adapted to and thus encounters more individuals of its own species than the competing species. This means that, even if the species consume the same resources, they are competing mostly against their own species for the resources where they live and this increases the strength of intraspecific competition over interspecific competition. To put this in consumer–resource terms, there are different resource pools in the different habitats, so that even if the two species draw on the same types of resources, they are drawing them down in distinct places (different spatial niches) and not directly engaging in exploitative competition interspecifically. Ironically, although Gause’s experiments with the competing species Paramecium aurelia and P. caudatum were highly influential in cementing the notion of competitive exclusion, at the same time he conducted experiments with P. caudatum and P. busaria that led to stable coexistence because P. caudatum foraged bacteria in open water column, while P. bursaria was a benthic forager on the bottom of the jar, a clear case of coexistence through distinct habitats (Gause 1936; Leibold & Chase 2018; Figure 8.1). As the spatial scales coarsen and larger areas are examined, it becomes ever easier to imagine coexistence being facilitated by spatial heterogeneity.

Figure 8.1 Pairs of Paramecium spp. may show competitive exclusion (A) or coexistence (B). The competitive exclusion case is more famous. However, Gause also found a case of stable coexistence where P. bursaria is a benthic (bottom) habitat specialist and has a distinct niche. After Leibold and Chase (2018).  

##### Temporal variation in the environment can also promote species coexistence

Just as variation in space can lead to coexistence, temporal heterogeneity of the environment can lead to coexistence. There are three main ways temporal heterogeneity can lead to coexistence. First, species can partition the annual cycle of seasons or the daily cycle of night and day, living or being active at different parts of these cycles; but care is required. Such **temporal niche partitioning** does eliminate interference competition, but temporal niche partitioning does not automatically guarantee reduced resource competition. This is because species active at different times but living in the same space, may well share the same resource pool. For example, spring annual plants and fall annual plants may well access the same soil nutrient pool. Temporal niche partitioning can only eliminate resource competition if the resources available at different times are different (e.g., diurnal swallows and nocturnal bats feed on different insect species), or if the resources are replenished faster than the temporal niche partitioning time scale. For example, herbivorous insects that live in the spring probably access different plants than herbivorous insects in the fall. Of course, spring annual plants and fall annual plants may still compete for nutrients, but they do not compete with each other for light or probably water, and thus meet the requirement for accessing different resource pools through their temporal niche partitioning.

The second major way temporal heterogeneity can lead to coexistence in resource competition is when the resource itself fluctuates in availability over time and the consumer species have trade-offs in their relative ability to exploit low and high resource densities. This was discussed in Chapter 7, when resource competition theory was introduced. Consider again Figure 7.5. In this example, the species’ birth rate curves cross, such that one species has a relatively greater population growth rate at low resource levels and the other species has a relatively greater population growth rate at high resource levels. Note that the absolute ability is always lower for both species on a low density resource—it is the relative ability that changes. These two consumer types have been termed gleaners and opportunists, respectively (Frederickson and Stephanopoulos 1981; Grover 1990). Species 2 is a gleaner because it grows relatively well when the resource is scarce. Species 1 is an opportunist—it grows relatively poorly at low resource levels, but grows well when resources are abundant. In a constant environment, we would expect species 2 to win in competition because it has the lower R*. However, as we saw in Chapter 7, if resource levels fluctuate between high and low abundance then the two species may coexist because species 1 (opportunist) has a growth advantage at high resource abundance and species 2 (gleaner) has a growth advantage at low resource abundance. Note that this coexistence is possible because of non-linear resource use curves - this allows them to cross multiple times and create multiple domains with different outcomes. Chesson (2000a) calls this mechanism involving non-linear resource use combined with fluctuation in resources **relative non-linearity**. 

A third major way environmental fluctuation can lead to coexistence occurs when organisms have long-lived adults that are relatively insensitive to environmental variation (e.g. trees), but the juveniles of different species are sensitive to the environment and do best under different environmental conditions. This is called the **storage effect** (Chesson & Huntly 1997) and is covered in more detail in Chapter 15.

##### Ways in which dispersal and immigration can promote species coexistence

**An open system with immigration** can also lead to coexistence. Imagine a system with two species and two patches. Suppose species A is better adapted to patch a, and species B is better adapted to patch b. If there was no dispersal, then one would expect A to competitively exclude species B in patch a, and vice versa. Now imagine that a small fraction of the individuals born each generation disperse to the other patch. This would prevent competitive exclusion from happening because there is a constant supply of new individuals who have not yet experienced competition. Such a system is an example of source–sink dynamics or mass-effects in metacommunities, both of which will be discussed in more detail in Chapters 13 and 14. Levin (1974) analyzed an even more extreme case where the two patches were identical and the two species were such that the contingent exclusion case of L–V applies (whichever species starts with more individuals competitively excludes the others). If one patch starts with more of species A and one patch starts with more of species B, then coexistence occurs by dispersal maintaining species in patches from which it would otherwise be excluded. If dispersal is non-existent then competitive exclusion will occur in each patch— species A & B will not coexist within a single patch. If dispersal is too high then the system functions like one patch and one species will competitively exclude the other in both patches. However, if dispersal is intermediate, then coexistence within a patch will occur. Note that this coexistence occurs even when both patches are identical so no spatial heterogeneity is required. Multiple patches and dispersal is all that is needed for coexistence in this source-sink coexistence. Another way dispersal can potentially promote the coexistence of a large number of species in the **competition-colonization trade-off model** (Hastings 1980; Nee & May 1992; Tilman 1994). In this model, there is a trade-off between competitive ability (e.g., lower R*) and dispersal ability (specifically the ability to get to new patches). Competition–colonization trade-offs are discussed in more detail in Chapter 13. Bolker and Pacala (1999) identified a third coexistence scenario that they call the **exploiter strategy**. The exploiter strategy is similar to the competition–colonization trade-off, but instead of specializing in getting to newly open patches quickly, exploiters specialize in very quickly extracting resources from new patches before competitively superior species arrive and then disperse locally to maximize their ability to exploit new patches.

Can dispersal in the absence of a trade-off lead to coexistence? A number of authors (Atkinson and Shorrocks 1981; Ives and May 1985; Silvertown et al. 1992; Bolker and Pacala 1997) have pointed out that if species disperse locally, then each species is more likely to come into contact with individuals of its own species than its competitor, increasing the strength of intraspecific competition vs interspecific. This is especially true when the aggregation is enhanced by a patchy environment (Atkinson and Shorrocks 1981; Shorrocks and Svenster 1995). This mechanism cannot prevent competitive exclusion in the long run (Durrett & Levin 1994; Bolker et al. 2003), but it can slow exclusion down for very long periods of time, a conclusion with empirical support (Stoll and Prati 2001). Whether this mechanism leads to coexistence is partly a matter of definition of coexistence. It cannot lead to what we will call stable coexistence in a few sections hence, but it could be a form of unstable coexistence that may be an important explanation for the coexistence we observe in the natural world.

This distinction between permanent coexistence vs coexisting for a long time before stochastic drift causes a stochastic extinction that cannot be reversed, came to the fore during ecology’s discussion about neutral models in the 2000s (discussed in detail in Chapter 14). Before that time, few bothered to draw a distinction. However, neutral theory caused many people to recognize the potential importance of this distinction, which became one of the motivations for advancing the study of coexistence theory. In the next section we will give a precise definition of stable coexistence. To do so we need to return to the models of Chapter 7, which have an attractor (the system returns to an equilibrium with coexistence whenever stochastically perturbed off of it). These models specify the conditions under which a stable coexisting equilibrium exists.



#### How do we tell if the strength of intraspecific competition is greater than interspecific competition (αjj> αji)?

Two major types of equilibrium models were presented in Chapter 7, which presents ecologists studying competition with a dilemma—whether to use the L–V model or a consumer–resource model. On the one hand, L–V models are quite generic in the type of competition they can represent. Indeed, they simply implement the definition of competition by having each species have a phenomenological parameter for their negative impact on the growth rate of the other species (the α12 and α21 of Equation 7.5). Unfortunately, interpreting these phenomenological parameters then becomes pivotal in determining whether species coexistence is possible. The qualitative claim that intraspecific competition has to be stronger than interspecific competition to allow two competing species to coexist has a precise mathematical statement, α jj> αji (switching now to the formulation of Equation 7.5). How do we look at a real world situation and know if α jj> αji? Because the α’s apply broadly across diverse scenarios of competition, such as resource competition, niche partitioning, interference competition, etc., the answer is not obvious. On the other hand, consumer–resource models are explicitly mechanistic and make predictions about R* that are directly interpretable and testable (e.g., Figure 7.11) As shown in Chapter 7, R* can be measured in the real world and used to make predictions about coexistence. On the down-side, consumer–resource models poorly represent some common types of competition (e.g., interference competition and apparent competition discussed in Chapter 7). Even for exploitation competition, consumer resource models depend on the notion of distinct resource types. However, a common form of exploitation competition involves only a single type of resource that is differentiated along a continuous gradient.

Let us briefly examine a well-studied example of exploitation competition along a continuous resource gradient involving Darwin’s Finches (Geospiza) and their consumption of seeds of different sizes. In Darwin’s finches, both the birds (specifically their beaks) and the seeds show continuous variation in size. While most birds can eat most seeds, species with larger beaks are more efficient with and prefer larger seeds and vice versa (Schluter and Grant 1984) (Figure 8.2). When two species of Darwin’s Finches, G. fortis and G. fulginosa, occur alone on different islands they show substantial overlap in beak size (and, hence, seed size preference). However, when the two species compete with each other on the same island, their beak sizes evolve such that there is almost no overlap in size and hence little overlap in resource use (Figure 8.3). This is a classic example of character displacement (Lack 1947; Schluter et al. 1985; Grant 1986), which is “the situation in which, when two species of animals overlap geographically, the differences between them are accentuated in the zone of sympatry and weakened or lost entirely in the parts of their ranges outside this zone” (Brown & Wilson 1956). Character displacement is an evolutionary response to reduce the intensity of competition by reducing niche overlap. Competition is clearly an important force in these birds, strong enough to drive evolution, but this scenario does not map well to a consumer–resource model. If we use a L–V model, can we say whether intraspecific competition is stronger than interspecific in the allopatric case? How about the sympatric case? How can we map this very detailed and persuasive example to the α coefficients in a L–V model?

Early empirical efforts to estimate the α’s in the L–V model focused on measuring overlaps in resource use between species competing for resources that could be arrayed on a continuous axis (see Figure 1.4 for a conceptual version and Figure 8.4 for a realworld example). This approach has some grounding in reality. As already discussed, birds within a guild often divide up resources with bigger birds eating bigger seeds (Pulliam 1985; Schluter and Grant 1984) and similarly for seed-eating mammals (Figure 8.4), and for insectivores and carnivores. Likewise, plants often show similar responses in, for example, the rate of photosynthesis vs temperature (Mooney and Ehleringer 2003).  

Figure 8.2 Preferred food size is related to beak size in five species of Darwin’s finches (Geopsiza). These bird species feed mostly on seeds and a bird’s beak is its chief instrument for acquiring, manipulating, and crushing seeds. The width of the smallest preferred seed increases with the size of the beak. This means that preferences for different seed sizes is an important way in which these species differ in their niche, causing interspecific competition to be weaker than intraspecific competition. Symbols correspond to finch species; Geospiza fuliginosa (red circles), G. difficilis (blue triangles), G. fortis (green squares), G. magnirostris (yellow circles), and G. conirostris (black diamond). Line fit by non-linear regression, with one outlier data point removed. After Schluter and Grant (1984).  

Thus, ecologists first looked to quantify the α-coefficients in the L–V competition model from measures of overlap in species’ resource use. Some of these attempts were quite successful. For example, MacArthur (1968) calculated measures of niche overlap for four species of warblers based on how much time they spent foraging in different parts of a spruce tree. He then converted niche-overlaps into α-coefficients and parameterized a multi-species L–V model that closely matched observed population dynamics. This seemed to suggest that niche overlap was all that was needed to estimate α-coefficients and the race was on, rapidly proliferating into hundreds of papers and a multitude of different metrics for niche overlap (Colwell and Futuyma 1971; Hurlbert 1978). Unfortunately, few of these efforts proved as successful as MacArthur’s. In hindsight, we now know that there is no reason they should. The α-coefficients in the L–V model are measures of how much an individual of one species suppresses the per capita population growth rate of another species. This may have little to do with how much their diet niches overlap, or, at best, the relationship between overlap in resource use and population growth rate impacts might be highly non-linear.

Figure 8.3 Character displacement in two Darwin’s finches, Geospiza fortis and G. fuliginosa. Beak depth is strongly correlated with the sizes of seeds the birds are able to eat; mean beak depth is indicated by triangles. Note that on Santa Cruz, where the two species are sympatric (co-occur), beak depth distributions are displaced relative to their distributions on Daphne Major and Los Hermános, where each species is found alone (allopatry). Such enhanced difference in a character trait (here, beak depth) between sympatric species is one response to competition for a resource. From Grant (1986).

Figure 8.4 An example of resource utilization curves for nine seed-eating rodent species found in three NA deserts (Sonoran, Mojave and Great Basin). Note that the size of seed harvested is generally correlated with the size of the rodent, but there is considerable overlap between species. After Brown (1975).  

Using resource overlap to estimate the strength of competition also led to the historically important idea of **limiting similarity** (briefly introduced in Chapter 1). To address the question of how similar species can be in their niches and still coexist, MacArthur and Levins (1967) started with the assumption that overlap in resource utilization (niche) could be equated to the α-coefficients in the L–V model. They then added in the assumption that resource utilization curves were normal (bell curve) shaped and used a particular metric for calculating niche overlap. They compared the distance between the peaks of the resource utilization curves, which they called d, and the width of the resource utilization curves, w, which was defined as the standard deviation of the normalshaped resource utilization curve (Figure 1.4). They found that for coexistence to occur required d ≥ w. This was an intuitively appealing and mathematically precise result. Here, at last, was a limit on how similar species could be to meet the vague L–V requirement that intraspecific competition be greater than interspecific. May (1973a) and May and MacArthur (1972) extended this result to show that in a stochastically variable environment one needed d ≥ wσ where σ was the standard deviation of environmental variation. Unfortunately, the notion of a universal limit to similarity quickly began to unwind (reviewed in Abrams 1983b). As already noted, resource overlap does not equate to impacts on species’ demographics and the theoretical result turned out not to be very mathematically robust. If you change the method of calculating overlap, limiting similarity falls apart (Abrams 1975) as it also does if you use a resource utilization curve shape other than normal (Roughgarden 1974). We now know there are no universal (or “hard”) limits to similarity as originally envisioned by MacArthur and Levins (1967). However, recent work has shown that, while there are no formal limits to similarity, the more tightly packed a community is in terms of niche space the more fragile is species coexistence to any perturbation in model parameters (Meszéna et al. 2006; Barabás et al. 2012, 2013). The extreme fragility of tightly packed communities suggests a reinterpretation of the limiting similarity principle, rather than its abandonment. The current best attack on the question of how to interpret the meaning of intraspecific competition> interspecific competition (or αjj> αji) starts by abandoning the L–V model altogether. It was begun by Chesson and Huntly (1997) and expanded by Chesson (2000a, 2018), Adler (2007, 2010) Levine and HilleRisLambers (2009) and Letten, Ke and Fukami (2017) among others. Chesson and Huntly (1997) boiled competition down to its bare essence and developed a very simple, but very general model

[Eqn 8.1]

Here, s is the subscript for the S different species in the system. In this model, the per capita growth rate of a species in competition was separated into two components. A density-independent component, rt captures the fit of the organism to its environment and probably fluctuates over time as the environment changes (hence, the t subscript). The second component consists of one density-dependent factor (Ft), be it resource competition, interference competition, predators, etc., where the effect on the per capita growth rate depends on the population size, N (i.e. density). The parameter b is simply the sensitivity of the species to those density-dependent factors. Expansions of the model having multiple density-dependent limiting factors (Ft) simply reconfirm that multiple limiting factors are needed for multiple species to coexist and are not explored further here (but see Chesson & Huntly 1997).

Note that F t probably depends on the density of the other species, but we do not specify a specific form. All that is captured is that it, too, varies over time. This means we cannot explicitly solve for an equilibrium like we did with the models in Chapter 7, but we do not have to! In fact, this is one of the strengths of the Chesson–Huntly approach. It replaces strong assumptions about linear density dependence that allow for equilibrium analysis with more general assumptions about density-dependence that no longer allow equilibrium analysis. Instead this approach analyzes invasion ability. Invasion analysis looks at whether a species has a positive growth rate when it is rare and competing against another species (or set of species) that is fully established (i.e. at its carrying capacity for when no other species are present). A species that can invade under such conditions cannot be competitively excluded, while a species that cannot invade can be competitively excluded. It may be possible for two or more species that cannot mutually invade each other to coexist for a long time. Chesson (2000a) calls this **unstable coexistence**. The neutral models discussed in Chapter 14 are an example, as are the examples discussed earlier in this chapter, where limited dispersal kept individuals more in competition with their own species. Ultimately, however, stochastic drift makes species with unstable coexistence go extinct and, then, because they cannot invade, they can no longer coexist. The example discussed earlier where short-distance dispersal that causes a species to come in contact with and compete more with its own species is another example of unstable coexistence. It can prolong coexistence, but it does not have a recovery mechanism when a chance event eliminates one species. Chesson and Huntly instead focused on stable coexistence. This occurs when each species is able to invade the system when rare. Here, even if a stochastic event causes a species to go extinct, it can re-invade and re-establish coexistence.

Using this very general model of competition and invasion analysis, Chesson and Huntly were able to reason in general about competition. A number of their key insights relate to fluctuating environments and will be covered in Chapter 15. However, one can map this general equation (Equation 8.1) back to a number of specific models including consumerresource models, L–V models (Chesson and Huntly 2007) and a plant competition model (Adler et al. 2007). The details of the exact mappings vary, but the results all share several common features. We start with the example of mapping the Chesson– Huntly model (Equation 8.1) back to the consumer resource model (Chesson 2000a). This gives the percapita-growth rate for species i trying to invade against an established species, s, as:

[Eqn 8.2]

Here the r i/bi terms capture our original notion that fitness has a density independent component (ri) decreased or rescaled by sensitivity to density dependence (bi). Together these terms give what works as the notion of invasion ability or invasion fitness, fi=ri/bi so we can rewrite (2) as

[Eqn 8.3]

The only new variable is ρ, which stands for resource overlap. Here, at last, we have a model that actually incorporates resource overlap. Note that, when overlap is 100% (i.e. ρ=1), the red term disappears and the model simplifies to the blue term

[Eqn 8.4]

These equations lead to the following points:

1. The key measure of competitive ability that determines winners of competition is invasion fitness, fi, which is an increasing function of the densityindependent responses to the environment (ri) and a decreasing function of sensitivity to competition (bi). The latter can also be phrased as an increasing function of tolerance (1/bi) to competition. These are the two main factors which determine superior competitors.

2. Without niche separation (i.e. Equation 8.4), when invasion fitnesses differ (fi ≠ fs), then only the species with the largest fi will survive. Every other species will have a negative per-capita growth rate in invasion conditions (since fi <fs for all i≠s). This is the competitive exclusion scenario (only one species remains).

3. Without niche separation (Equation 8.4), if fitnesses (fi) are all equal, they will neither grow nor shrink deterministically, but will change only through stochastic variation (i.e. drift). However, once a species drifts to extinction it cannot reinvade (invasion per capita growth rate is zero). This is the unstable coexistence scenario discussed above.

4. With niche separation (Equation 8.3), the blue portion of Equation 8.3 is negative for all but the most invasion capable species (highest-ranked fi). However, the red term is positive and added to the blue part. Thus, it is possible that if the red term is positive enough the per capita growth rate can be positive even when the fitness difference is negative (i.e., it is not the top-ranked species).

These observations lead to the following terminology. The red part of Equation 8.3 is called the **stabilizing effect**. When it is larger (i.e., when niche overlap, ρ, is smaller) it makes it easier for species to coexist. When the differences in invasion fitness is large (the blue part of Equation 8.3), it is very hard for the niche overlap (red) part of the equation to compensate, making coexistence unlikely. Conversely, when the differences in invasion fitness between species ( fi–fs) is small, this is called an equalizing effect. With more equalizing effects, relatively weaker stabilizing effects are needed to make the per capita growth rate positive (leading to the ability to invade and create stable coexistence). Specifically, when the stabilizing component (red) is larger than the fitness differences (blue component), then the per capita invasion growth rate becomes positive and stable coexistence occurs.  

> Box 8.1 Shared vs distinct preference niche structuring

> Characterizing the resource use of species along a continuous axis of resource availability (e.g., seed size for birds and mammals, soil moisture for plants) has played a central role in how ecologists have thought about niche partitioning and niche overlap. But it has been recognized for decades that even when the resource is continuous there are at least two ways species can differentiate along the axis (Colwell and Fuentes 1975; Keddy 1989; Wisheu 1998; see Figure 8.5). The classic scenario already discussed (Figures 1.4, 8.2, 8.5A) is the distinct preference scenario. Each species is optimal at a different location along the continuous axis and would be found to be most abundant at that optimum, regardless of the presence or absence of other species. Here, the tradeoff is in where the optimum goes. We saw such a trade-off in Darwin’s finches where different beak sizes in birds are optimal at handling different seed sizes (Figure 8.2). In the shared-preference scenario, every species prefers to be at the same optimum environment (in Figure 8.5B high soil moisture) and does best there. In other words, they share the same optimum. However, the species differ in two other aspects. First, some species are able to tolerate poorer environments (here, low soil moisture; in Figure 8.5B black can tolerate the worst environment). Secondly, some species do better in the shared optimal environment than others (in Figure 8.5B yellow can perform the best in the optimal environment. We call this species dominant over the other species. The dominant species would competitively exclude (or at least greatly lower the abundance of the other species) in the optimal environment. This often happens by having a superior R* for exploitation competition or by being physical larger or more aggressive and therefore able to win in interference competition. These two factors are part of a trade-off such that the most tolerant species perform the worst in the optimal environment and vice-versa. This is called dominancetolerance trade-off (Grime 1977; Rosenzweig 1991).

> One of the first experimental field studies of competition provides a good example of shared preferences (even though it is sometimes mistakenly described as an example of distinct preference). Connell (1961a,b) studied two species of barnacles, Chthamalus and Balanus, that grow at the same sites on the Scottish coast. The two species show strong zonation along the vertical tidal gradient. Chthalamus is found higher up in the intertidal zone, while Balanus is found lower down. Through a series of careful experiments and observations, Connell showed that Balanus and Chthamalus larvae can both settle in the high intertidal (which is out of the water much of the time), but that Chthamalus survives better than Balanus because it tolerates desiccation better. Removal of Balanus from the high intertidal had little effect on Chthamlus survival. Chthamalus and Balanus larvae also settle in the middle intertidal, where both species survive well initially. However, in the middle and lower intertidal, Chthamlus eventually died. Connell showed that its death was due to interference competition from Balanus. Balanus overgrew, crushed and popped loose the Chthamlus individuals, killing them, but when Balanus was experimentally removed, Chthamalus survived in this zone for the duration of the study. Thus, both species did well in the middle intertidal zone, but only Balanus was found living there because it was competitively dominant over Chthamalus. In the high intertidal, only Chthamlus could survive the environmental conditions and thus was the environmentally tolerant species. In Figure 8.5B if we change the horizontal axis to distance below high tide, Chthamalus is the red species and Balanus is the blue species.

> Figure 8.5 Comparing distinct preference niches (A) vs shared preference niches (B). In (A) each species (differently colored lines) has optimal performance at a distinct part of the gradient. This leads directly to the species existing (or at least being most abundant) at a particular part of the gradient (shown by the colored horizontal lines along the x-axis). In (B) each species performs optimally in the same part of the gradient (high soil moisture), but there is a trade-off where some species are better able to tolerate poor environments (e.g., the blue species), but are not strong competitors while other species are strong competitors at the cost of low tolerance for poor conditions (e.g., yellow species). Note that the pattern of where species occur (or are most abundant), again shown by horizontal lines on the x-axis, is almost identical between (A) and (B); only removal or density manipulation experiments can distinguish these two scenarios.

> Figure 8.6 Some of the results from the Campbell and Grime (1992) experiment discussed in the text. A logarithmic gradient of nutrients was created running from high on the left to low on the right. A disturbance gradient was created from none on the top to high on the bottom. Each of seven species was planted in a monoculture (left graph of each pair). All seven species were also grown together (equal seed frequencies) in a mixed plot (right graph of each pair).  

> Dominance–tolerance trade-offs are also found in plants. In these scenarios, the dominance (or interference competition) portion often occurs by growing bigger and especially taller to block the other species from receiving light, although it can include allelopathy and a variety of other mechanisms. A nice demonstration of shared preference can be found in an experiment by Campbell and Grime (1992). They constructed a series of garden beds with a 2-dimensional experimental design. In one direction ran a gradient of low to high nutrients. In the other direction ran a gradient of low to high disturbance (clipping) so that all possible combinations could be found in one planting bed. They then grew seven species of grasses in monoculture, and all seven species together (with an initial seed density of 1/7 of the mix for each species). Water and light were controlled and equal across all treatments. After 1 year, the biomass of each species in each treatment was measured. Each species’ biomass was greatest in the low disturbance, high nutrient treatment (i.e. shared preference, see left columns of Figure 8.6). What was interesting was how the different species responded in the seven-species competition experiment. Some competitively dominant species (Arrhenatherum in Figure 8.6) continued to be most abundant in the optimal conditions, even though their abundance was reduced by competition. Other species shifted to show a maximum abundance in suboptimal conditions once competition was present (Festuca was most abundant in low disturbance, intermediate nutrient regimes and Lolium was most abundant in high nutrient, intermediate disturbance regimes). Poa was strongly affected by competition and its highest biomass under competition was found in high-nutrient, high-disturbance regimes, its least preferred regime without competition.

> This experiment also shows how shared preference can be extended when there are multiple gradients of stress to what is called **centrifugal organization** (Rosenzweig and Abramsky 1986; Keddy 1989; Rosenzweig 1991; Wisheu 1998). The word “centrifugal” means “fleeing the center”. In community organization it means every species prefers to grow in the best conditions of each gradient (e.g., no disturbance, high nutrients). However, only the competitive dominants get to grow abundantly there. The higher environmental tolerance, competitive subordinates flee those conditions under competition, but because there are multiple gradients, they can flee in different “directions” (Lolium to more disturbance, but still high nutrients and Festuca the opposite). An important point is that you cannot distinguish a distinct preference from a shared preference scenario simply by observation in the field; in both shared and distinct preference species are found to serially replace each other along a gradient. However, the underlying mechanisms are very different. Only removal or density manipulation experiments can determine which scenario is operating. In a meta-analysis of field competition experiments that performed these manipulations, shared preference organization was twice as likely as distinct preference (34 vs 17 cases; Wisheu 1998).

Again, the details of Equations 8.2–8.4 depend on the exact model used to derive them. Recall Equations 8.2–8.4 came from a consumer resource model (also see Letten et al. 2017). However, the general principals of fitness being a function of both density independent growth rates and tolerance of competition, and fitness differences balancing with stabilizing effects (niche differences) apply across a wide suite of models that have been put into this Chesson– Huntly decomposition framework including L–V models (Chesson and Huntly 1997, Appendix A) and a plant competition model (Adler et al. 2007; Levine & HilleRisLambers 2009). Two up-to-date, pedagogically-oriented derivations of coexistence theory may be found in Letten et al (2017) and Barabás et al. (2018). Letten et al. (2017) emphasize the consumer–resource model derivation and build links to niche theory, pointing out that fluctuating resource supply vectors are a form of equalizing mechanism, while varying impact (consumption) vectors are a form of stabilizing mechanism. Barabás et al. (2018) develop a very general derivation of coexistence theory based on approximation methods and suggest that caution is needed in drawing a sharp contrast between equalizing and stabilizing mechanisms. Chesson has also provided his own recent overview and synthesis (2018).



#### Predation and coexistence

For almost 100 years, coexistence theory was framed in the context of competition. L–V theory and Gause developed the concept of competitive exclusion. The notions of limiting similarity (MacArthur and Levins 1967) consumer–resource models (Tilman 1982) and coexistence theory (Chesson and Huntly 1997; Chesson 2000a) are all framed in terms of competition. Even neutral theory which in some senses is the opposite of stable coexistence is developed for a single trophic level.

However, Holt’s development of apparent competition (1977, reviewed in Holt and Bonsall 2017 and Chapter 7) began to suggest that coexistence might require thinking beyond competition to multiple trophic levels. Consumer-resource models focus on R* as the key predictor between competitive consumers. However, there is an analogous P* notion for the prey that can withstand the highest predator densities (Holt et al. 1994). Recently, Chesson and Kuang (Kuang and Chesson 2008; Chesson and Kuang 2008) have combined Holt’s notion of apparent competition via predation with the Chesson and Huntly’s (1997) approach to coexistence based on analyzing invasion capabilities when rare. Just as in formulas 1–4 we can break a two-predator, twoprey system into notions of fitness (with fitness broken into a density independent component and a density-dependent tolerance of predation component) and niche overlap. Stable coexistence occurs when niche overlap is small or fitness differences are small. As a result, species can coexist even when their resource use is identical if their differences in sensitivity to predators is small or their “predator niche” overlap is low. The prey just need to differ in the degree to which they are limited by different natural enemies (see discussion of apparent competition in Chapter 7 for more details). The notions of temporal coexistence mechanisms such as relative non-linearity (Chapter 7) and fluctuating coexistence like the storage effect (Chapter 14) also extend into predator-prey systems (Kuang and Chesson 2008). Thus, it is not a reach to say that all of the theory of coexistence in competitive systems has parallel concepts and effects in predator–prey systems. It is a satisfying result that instead of debating the relative importance of competition and predation, we can now say that they are symmetric and in a fundamental sense equivalent.  



#### Conclusion

Given the propensity for competition models to predict competitive exclusion, how can we explain the coexistence of so many species everywhere we look? Especially in organisms like trees or phytoplankton where the basic requirements for light, water, and nutrients are very similar and the number of possible dimensions for niche separation seem small. As Hutchinson (1961), in his paradox of the plankton paper, suggested much of the answer lies in spatial and temporal heterogeneity. While Hutchinson’s basic intuition was right, we now better understand that not all spatial and temporal heterogeneity produces coexistence (see Chapter 15, Section “Why resetting competition does not enable coexistence”). Thus, ecologists have made significant advances in understanding when spatial and temporal heterogeneity can or cannot lead to coexistence. Hutchinson also missed the notion that dispersal and spatial structure alone (even devoid of heterogeneity) can lead to coexistence. To summarize, species can coexist by partitioning food and resources, habitats, and predators along multiple axes of variation, and in time and space, and also by dispersal (see Chesson quote at the start of this chapter). In short, the state of modern coexistence theory (Figure 8.7) makes it clear that there is no paradox of plankton. Rather, the paths to coexistence are many. Figure 8.7 presents the current state of coexistence theory as a branching tree of choices. Of the 16 tips of the tree, 12 involve coexistence and only four involve competitive exclusion (although this should not be taken as an estimate of the relative frequency of coexistence mechanisms). Thus, we see that Hutchinson’s paradox exists only in very simplified models and scenarios. Coexistence should be and is common.

The main lesson from this chapter is not that coexistence is hard or surprising, but that ecologists have not yet constructed a clear theory of the niche that maps onto coexistence predictions. One such mapping would be to go from an understanding of the niche to calculating the α-coefficients of the L–V model. This would allow us to understand when intraspecific competition was stronger than interspecific in terms of niches.

However, there are some general outlines of what such a general theory of niches and coexistence might look like. First and foremost, trade-offs play a central role. As Tilman (2007b, p. 93) notes, “Except for the diversity explanation based on neutrality (Hubbell 2001), all other explanations for the high diversity of life on Earth require tradeoffs.” The concept of trade-offs is fundamental to ecology and ecological trade-offs in a variety of contexts will be considered in later chapters. Just in the context of coexistence we have seen many important trade-offs including:

1. Different efficiencies in using essential resources like nutrients.

2. Different efficiencies along continuous gradients of resources like seed size, and habitats like temperature and vegetation.

3. Different efficiencies in avoiding particular predator species.

4. Different efficiencies in using day/night or seasonality (temporal niches).

5. A trade-off between competitive dominance and environmental tolerance.

6. A trade-off between competitive dominance vs colonization ability.

7. A trade-off in relative efficiencies in using low and high resource levels (gleaner/opportunist).

Figure 8.7 A graphical summary of the current state of understanding of coexistence theory. Each fork represents a choice of types of coexistence mechanisms, and the tips of the tree represent 12 different types of theories leading to coexistence and four cases where choices predict competitive exclusion. The right hand side of the graph represents that there are five general aspects of niche on which species can be differentiated to coexist. 

Thus, while all that we need to model for predicting coexistence is the resulting niche differentiation, it seems likely that a full theory of niches and coexistence will need to incorporate the evolutionary and physiological origins of trade-offs.

Secondly, the body of coexistence theory is incredibly complex and contains a long list of specific cases with seemingly little connection. Broad synthetic theory unifying coexistence mechanisms is needed. Such a theory appears to be emerging. Chesson (2000b, also see Amerasakare 2003) point out that there are exact parallels between coexistence mechanisms in varying space and time. The storage effect of time is analogous to what we called the source– sink coexistence model of space, and the partitioning mechanisms in space and time have parallels with partitioning of resources (Chesson 2000a,b), all three of which also have parallels with partitioning of predators (Chesson & Kuang 2008). We are close to a fully synthetic theory of at least the coexistence side of the story across the four dimensions of resources, predators, space, and time, but this work still needs to be linked into the theory of niches.

Finally, we need to build a better, more synthetic understanding of the empirical patterns of niche differentiation. Although we now have hundreds of examples of niche differentiation, they have not really been pulled together into a general understanding of what types of niche differentiation are more common or rare in nature, or what types of niche differentiation can or cannot co-occur within a single system. Early papers by Schoener (1974) and Wisheu (1998) give some interesting hints, but they have been poorly followed up on. We noted earlier that Wisheu found that shared-preference niches were twice as common as distinct preference, but she also found more detailed patterns. Autotrophs and heterotroph subgroups within a single species (e.g. ontogenetic or sexual subgroups), almost always partitioned by shared niches, while herbivore or parasite preferences for hosts almost always showed distinct preferences. Only interspecific heterotrophs truly showed a mix of shared and distinct preferences. Schoener (1974) found that habitat differences were more common than food differences that were more common than temporal partitioning. Temporal partitioning was rare compared with food and habitat (although he did not look at the temporally fluctuating mechanisms), but daily niche separation was more common among predators and terrestrial poikilotherms, while seasonal niche separation was rare in vertebrates. Food partitioning is more common when the food is larger than usual relative to the body size of the consumer. Schoener also found that all combinations of differentiation along multiple axes (e.g., habitat and food) could be found. All of these patterns have obvious ecological explanations, but there has been little to no follow up on any of these hypotheses in the last four decades and it is unknown how robust they are.

In summary, both niche theory (Chapter 1) and competition theory (Chapter 7) have played central roles in community ecology for over 100 years and they naturally fit together. Grinnell linked competitive exclusion and niche theory as far back as 1917: “It is, of course, axiomatic that no two species regularly established in a single fauna have precisely the same niche relationships”. However, this unification of the two theories has proven to be harder than it might seem with many false turns in the road. We now have a rich understanding of how species can coexist and now need to return to the understanding of the complexities of the niche and how they map onto coexistence.



#### Summary

1. The prevalence of competitive exclusion in models of competition stands in contrast to the rarity of monocultures in nature.

2. Consumer-resource models, L–V models and Gause’s bottle experiments all remove spatial heterogeneity, temporal heterogeneity, and dispersal and migration. Each of these factors can lead to coexistence in several ways.

3. L–V models are the most general and apply to all forms of competition, but they are phenomenological and difficult to interpret in the real world. Equating the α coefficients to niche overlap and the idea of limiting similarity were early efforts that did not survive the test of time.

4. A more effective approach to understand coexistence involves analyzing invasion capabilities. Unstable coexistence mechanisms can occur (such as neutral theory or limited dispersal), but stable coexistence only occurs when each species can invade the other when rare. Models point to the importance of fitness differences based on densityindependent growth rates and tolerance to competition. Coexistence occurs by a combination of equalizing effects (minimizing fitness differences) and stabilizing effects (minimizing niche overlap).
5. All of the features of coexistence theory that exist for competition can also be found in predation.
6. Niche separation can be broadly classified as shared or distinct preferences. They provide the same end result, serial replacement of species along an environmental gradient. In shared preferences every species prefers the same portion of the resource axis. This difference from distinct preference can only be detected by removal or similar experiments. Shared preferences often involve a trade-off between environmental tolerance and competitive dominance.
7. There are many different coexistence mechanisms. They typically involve either shared or distinct niche separation, which invariably involves some type of trade-off. A promising research direction is to link coexistence mechanisms to niche theory and trade-off theory.